		  New and Revised Web Pages and GUIs

a) A Flash9 version of the thermal transect was created for improved
web page performance:

http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/engineering/thermal_transect/flex2/thermal_transect/bin/thermal_transect.html

Links are incorporated throughout this web page to more detailed
information on current data and graphs.  This web page also allows the
user to pick which temperatures are included in the thermal transect
display.  This web page is also available from the MMT Engineering web
page: http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/engineering/.

b) Various web pages were created and updated to accompany the new
thermal transect, including:

http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/engineering/rrd/rrd_viewer.php 

This web page now has more complete access the RRDTool databases.

c) Bugs were fixed in the edb_gui, which allows Xephem and two-line
element (TLE) format catalogs to be used at the MMT.  In addition, a
CGI version of this code was written to allow calculation of sidereal
and non-sidereal objects from web pages.  A new web page that uses
this CGI script for solar system objects is at:

http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/engineering/edb_cgi/solar.html

d) New web pages were created for the: 

  i) mount axial and transverse counterweights: 
     http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/engineering/counterweights/bin/counterweights.html
  ii) building error and mount drive currents:
     http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/engineering/mount_drives/bin/mount_drives.html
  iii) rotator motor drive currents:
     http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/engineering/rotator_drives/bin/rotator_drives.html

Although these web pages use Flash9, techniques were developed for
having similar dynamic gauges using only Javascript.  These
Javascript-based gauges can run on both 32-bit and 64-bit browsers
while the Flash9 versions require a 32-bit browser because of the
Flash plugin. Future versions of similar web pages may use the
Javascript approach to gauges.

e) A new weather web page was created that combines wind rose diagrams
and other plots from the east and west Vaisala WXT510 units:
http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/weather/wind_details.html.  Repairs
continue on various weather sensors.  The Vaisala3 unit is at the
manufacturer for repairs of its heating unit.  It may be possible to
repair the Young wind unit if enough spare parts can be found.  This
unit was damaged by lightning during the summer monsoons.

f) More research was done on optimizing web pages, specifically in the
use of Document Object Model (DOM) textnodes for displaying data in
web pages.  Modifications were made to the MMTDiv Javascript class to
use textnodes for optimal web page performance.  Use of textnodes is
perhaps the most significant way in which web pages can be optimized
by minimizing DOM manipulations.

g) Work was started on a status server that uses the mini.pm Perl module. 
This server would maintain status information for the cell, hexapod,
mount, thermal system, and network.  A draft web page, modeled after the
interlock GUI, is at:

http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/engineering/sysstat/sysstat.html

This would replace
http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/engineering/sysstat/sysstat.php. 

h) Finally, further consolidation of Apache web server configurations
that are specific to the MMT have been collected into an mmt.conf file
for both hacksaw and mmto.


				 SPIE Abstracts

The MMT staff has submitted several abstracts for papers to present at
the SPIE Atronomical Instrumentation conference to be held in June,
2008:

- Duane Gibson submitted one for a paper that will describe results of
  benchmarking studies and techniques to improve web browser
  performance for highly dynamic data.

- Tim Pickering submitted one for a paper that will describe the
  results of steady-state finite element thermal analysis of the MMT
  primary mirror and how their predictions compare to what has been
  measured with our wavefront sensors.  


			     Network Authentication

In continued efforts to integrate and secure our network
authentication, various options were investigated for getting the
MMT's Google calendar to use our LDAP scheme.  Although there are some
possible approaches for using LDAP, the current approach of using a
common "mmtstaff" Google account seems to be the most attractive.  The
main reason for LDAP authentication is internal security within MMT's
network.  The Google calendar is outside of this security requirement.

Likewise, enabling LDAP authentication for SiteScape would be
problematic, require significant support from Steward ETS, and extra
costs on our part to enable accounts for everyone.  Maintaining a
single-signon for all MMT staff does not put our network at risk, but
does involve some risk to the data we wish to store within SiteScape.
This should be kept in mind if we wish to store sensitive data within
that system.


			 Autoguider Software

The SAOguider software relies on a DT3155 framegrabber to digitize
video signals into images that can be analyzed.  It is used primarily
for Blue and Red channel with the videoscope ICCD, but it also used
with the f/15 NGS topbox with their StellaCam.  Modifications were
made to the linux driver for the DT3155 card so that it no longer
limits the amount of useful ram that a machine can have.  Another
limitation of the DT3155 card is that it seems to require using the
"noapic" kernel switch in order to operate successfully.  It may be a
hardware problem in that everything works properly when in APIC mode,
but no interrupts are being detected.  The "noapic" switch has little
performance impact for a single-processor machine so this is not a big
problem at the moment.

We have started looking into rationalizing the SAOguider and SOguider
interfaces.  The idea is to use the same user interface with all of
our different cameras.  Skip developed an interface between the current
SAOguider program and the azcam camera used by SOguider.  However, this
is based on the older version of SAOguider that we use and does not
appear to be close to an optimal way to run the camera.  The versions
of SAOguider used by MegaCam and Hecto are significantly updated and
support the features we wish to use with azcam.  For example, we want
the client and image server to run on separate machines whereas our
version only passes images via shared memory.  We may also want to
implement the automatic guide star selection and guide box
configuration that has been implemented for MegaCam. 


			MMT Seeing Statistics

The end of 2007 marked the end of 5 years of routine operational use
of our Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensors.  Over that time we have been
making seeing estimates based on modeling the full-widths at
half-maxima of the Shack-Hartmann spots.  The estimates generally
agree pretty well with direct measurements using imaging devices such
as MegaCam.  Tim reanalyzed all of the archived Shack-Hartmann frames
with the current version of the WFS analysis software to create a
consistent database of seeing measurements.  Culling out some
obviously bad data leaves 48,085 WFS frames to analyze.  

Figure 1 show the raw histogram of the measured seeing values with no
corrections made for airmass.  The mean seeing is 1.03" and the median
is 0.94".  Since WFS observations are generally taken in the vacinity
of science targets these numbers are a useful metric of what the
seeing quality has been during science observations.  Site seeing
measurements are generally extrapolated to a seeing value at zenith.
The standard model of atmospheric turbulence gives the relation:

seeing(z=0) = seeing(z)/sec(z)**0.6

where z is the zenith angle of the observation.  Figure 2 shows the
results of applying this correction to the WFS seeing measurements.
The mean seeing adjusts down to 0.9" and the median to 0.82".  

Further analysis work is ongoing to look for trends in seeing as a
function of azimuth, time of year, time of night, wind speed, etc.
The effects of tracking errors and engineering nights with lots of WFS
data taken also need to be accounted for.  

Figure 1 (seeing_hist.ps): Histogram of 48,085 seeing measurements
taken from the F/9 and F/5 Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensors.  

Figure 2 (zenith_seeing_hist.ps): Histogram of the data shown in
Figure 1 corrected for the airmassess of the observations to show
expected seeing values at zenith. 


			     OS Upgrades

Fedora Core 8 was released in late October while Fedora Core 6 was
demoted to legacy status in early December.  Machines that were still
running FC6 were updated to FC8 over the course of late November
through December.  The ability to perform OS upgrades on-the-fly using
the yum command has improved considerably.  In each case the upgrade
went very smoothly with very little extra tweaking required to make it
work.  The two main server computers, mmto.org and hacksaw, are still
running FC6 and will be updated by the end of January.  

A new version of IRAF also was released in December and was included
as part of the FC8 upgrade.  A few more astronomy-related tools that
Tim had previously been packaging himself have now become included in
Fedora most notably DS9.
