		      F/5 Open Loop Corrections

We have been seeing significant changes in the behavior of the f/5
front-end over the course of Fall 2005 and through Spring 2006.  The
most significant difference is in the Y axis.  Analyzing WFS logs
over the course of the March and April f/5 runs finds a very large
shift of 2 mm or more compared to what was observed in November 2005.
There is some indication of a change in the shape of the Y-Elevation
relation, but it's inconclusive due to the large scatter in the WFS
data.  The scatter is about twice as large as the scatter observed
when doing similar analysis of WFS data from 2005.  

While the fiber positioner was off-line on the night of April 25-26 we
took some engineering data with the WFS to more accurately calibrate
elevation-dependent effects.  The data were obtained by observing
stars with the WFS at a constant azimuth and over a range of elevation
from 25 to 85 degrees.  At each star, corrections were applied to the
secondary to fix focus, coma, and pointing.  Corrections were not
applied to the primary mirror while the engineering data was obtained.
The results are shown in Figure 1.  Taking data in a consistent
fashion under relatively stable conditions greatly reduces the amount
of scatter in the data.  Ideally, there should be no elevation
dependence in X or Theta-Y since they are perpendicular to the gravity
vector.  However, there clearly is significant motion in one of those
axes as the telescope tips down which is then compensated for in the
other axis to fix pointing and remove wavefront tilt.

The data shown in Figure 1 was taken while pointing west and keeping
azimuth near constant at 270.  There was a moderately strong, fairly
constant 30 mph wind from the south-southwest.  Swinging around and
taking a set of similar data while pointing east under similar wind
conditions shows some significant offsets in each of the axes.  Figure
2 shows the data taken in both runs plotted together.  The offsets
appear to be consistent with the different wind loading on the front
end.  This helps explain the large scatter seen in logged WFS data. 

Figure 3 shows best-fit relations between Y and elevation for the f/5
secondary.  The different relations were determined using dedicated
engineering data in November 2005 and on April 25, 2006 and using
different sets WFS data from before and after the April 2006 AO run.
The most remarkable feature is the huge, almost 2.5 mm offset between
the relation from fall 2005 and the ones determined in spring of 2006.
It turns out that around January 2, 2006 the SE and SW lateral
hardpoints became detached from the f/5 secondary.  As a result, the N
lateral hardpoint would pull the mirror up as far as it could.  This
works out to be very close to the 2.5 mm Y offset we observe.  The
N hardpoint pulls the mirror up in Y so the hexapod compensates by
moving it back down.  It's also rather remarkable that the secondary
has behaved as well and as consistently as it has after losing two
hardpoints.  Outside of the large offset the elevation behavior in Y
is very similar between the November 2005 and April 2006 engineering
data.  However, the large scatter seen in the WFS data and the
shifting seen during engineering on April 25-26 are probably
symptomatic of the lack of positional constraint within the f/5 cell.


Figure 1 (20060426.ps): Results of engineering data taken with the f/5
WFS on the night of April 25-26, 2006 showing the elevation dependence
of the five axes of M2 motion.  The plot of Z vs. Elevation is tilted
slightly to deproject the temperature dependence.

Figure 2 (20060426_both.ps):  Engineering data from the night of April
25-26, 2006 taken while pointing west (green points) and then pointing
east (red points). 

Figure 3 (elcoll_compare.ps): Y vs. Elevation relations determined at
different times between November 2005 and late April 2006.  Note the
very large offset of about 2.5 mm between November 2005 and all of the
results from 2006.



			  Zemax Short Course

During the week of April 3-7 T. E. Pickering attended one of the short
courses offered by the Zemax Corporation in Bellevue, WA.  The course
was the introductory level one that covered the basics of optical
design and Zemax use.  Some more advanced topics such as pupil
modeling, ray aiming, and tolerancing were also covered.  Since
attending the class, the acquired Zemax proficiency has been put to
use to model the surface displacements output from finite element
thermal modeling and convert them to wavefront errors.  Ongoing work
that utilizes Zemax includes writing ZPL macros to generate predicted
off-axis aberrations as a function of distance off-axis and rotator
angle for each of our optical configurations (e.g. f/5 spectroscopy,
f/5 imaging, bare f/9, etc.).  This is a required part of supporting
off-axis, continuous wavefront sensing.

