		      Servos and Mount Computer

In order to accelerate our efforts to develop new servo algorithms,
we have made significant enhancements to our mount simulator.  Up to
this time, we have run (as a simulator) a version of the mount code,
first on a spare VME computer running VxWorks, and later on a Pentium PC
running VxWorks.  Before the recent work, the code that we ran on the
simulator had many sections "stubbed out", in particular the modules
that read the encoders.  The new code no longer uses code stubs and
in fact the simulator runs the exact same code image that we run on the
actual mount.  Telescope motion and encoder feedback are simulated using
a model of the telescope.  In the case of the elevation axis, a very
precise state space model of the telescope is available and is used.

This simulator has been used to test and debug our new Simulink-generated
servo algorithms.  We have now integrated the new elevation servo
model into the mount code.  A number of initialization related problems
have been solved and we have a high level of confidence in going
ahead with the next round of on telescope tests.  The new simulator
is also expected to be useful for offline troubleshooting of other
non-servo related issues.


	      Hexapod Control and Performance Evaluation

Tom Trebisky, Duane Gibson, and Skip Schaller worked to deploy and
test new hexapod code to move all the motors in a coordinated fashion.
This should ensure that a focus command will not make the image of the
sky move around in the field during the motion.  Various anomalies
were discovered in both hexapods during the release and application of
the brakes as well as other erratic behavior of the pods.  An example
of the anomalies seen in the Pod F encoder output is shown in Figure
1.  This discovery led to more detailed evaluation of hexapod
performance.

Figure 1 (2006Aug30_12_49_43b.png): Examples of the Pod F glitches
observed during hexapod testing.  In this case, no secondary is
mounted and the hexapod is mounted on the teststand.  The hexapod was
moved from Z = +5000 microns to Z = -5000 with data sampled every 1
second.  The data are plotted with the length of each pod minus the
length of Pod A.  Ideally, the value for each pod would remain at zero
throughout the move.

This evaluation included comparing and contrasting coordinated and
uncoordinated motion, the release and application of brakes and servo
control during each move, and the trajectory of motion for each pod
during a move.  Data was collected at different telescope elevations
and with different payloads on the hexapods.  New data acquisition and
analysis tools have been developed for logging hexapod data at 1 Hz, a
higher resolution than has been available in the past.  Real-time
visualization tools have also been developed as part of this testing.
We still need to do more daytime testing as well as on-sky tests
during upcoming engineering nights to fully characterize hexapod
behavior. 


Updates to Blue/Red Channel Image Acquisition and Spectrograph Control
			       Software

Over shutdown we send the Blue and Red Channel cameras to ITL so they
could be modified to run with the new AZCAM PCI-based controller
systems.  An AZCAM interface is not required for our current Gen 1
controllers, but we will require a new controller when we get the new
camera for Red Channel.  We decided to take advantage of summer
shutdown to do the migration to AZCAM now rather than wait for the new
camera.  

The AZCAM system uses a network protocol that is completely different
than the one used by the vxworks system.  Therefore, we had to
completely rewrite our image acquisition software to support it.  Skip
Schaller did this and based it on IRAF's ICE interface to retain
backwards compatibility with the system observers and staff had become
familiar with.  Initial testing was done with the SOguider guide
camera and we are currently testing with the science cameras and
controllers downtown.  We are planning to commission this new system
during engineering on September 13.

Skip also wrote a new ICE interface to query the MMT TCS systems for
information to insert in image headers.  The new system gets
information via the SOAP protocol from the telstat server that also
feeds the telstat monitors.  This should be a lot more robust than the
MSG-based server we had used and is certainly far simpler and more
flexible.  

Skip modified the SCCS control software for the Red and Blue Channel
Spectrographs, separating it into client and server pieces.  The
server can now handle multiple clients which the previous GUI could
not.  An ICE instrument interface was written to communicate with this
new server.  This allows ICE to control spectrograph functions as well
as  fill in header information with spectrograph values, a feature
long-requested by observers.


			   Hexapod Offsets

Work is underway on incorporating different types of hexapod/secondary
mirror offsets into a more systematic approach to improve hexapod control,
trend analysis, and data mining.  Unique hexapod offsets have been
defined for instruments, thermal-dependent effects,
elevation-dependent effects, guiders, and wave-front sensors.  Input
from the telescope and instrument operators are captured into their
own separate offsets.  

In the past, these various hexapod offsets have been lumped together,
making analysis of individual effects on hexapod location and behavior
difficult.  This functionality has now been implemented in the hexapod
crate code and is available through the "remote" network protocol. 
Further work is needed to augment the "msg" protocol to handle these
offsets.  A new web-based graphic user interface is also being developed
and is ready for testing.  Modifications were made to the existing
"settings" server to include the various offsets and to improve the XML
format of the stored data.


	      Hexapod/UMAC/VME Servicing/Troubleshooting

The UMAC CPU was replaced because of communication failures.  We are
also addressing an intermittent "Tape Status" error.


			   GUI's/Web Pages

Work continues on creating new and improving existing web pages and GUI's.
A new PHP class, "xajaxMMT", was created to centralize MMT-specific
PHP/Ajax functionality.  This class extends the PHP class,
"xajaxResponse", of the xajax PHP/javascript library (see
http://www.xajaxproject.org/).  The new xajaxMMT class: 1) minimizes web
server/browser communication by only sending new values to the web
browser, and 2) provides class methods for common MMT GUI functionality,
such as changing background color based on system status.  The existing
Miniserver PHP class was also augmented to allow active control of
essentially all network-based MMT hardware, including the mount, hexapod,
and cell crates.  Methods for interacting with the settings server were
also added to the Miniserver class.

Thermal web pages that use these two PHP classes have been created for
Carrier chiller and Pit Neslab chiller control.  Other thermal web pages,
such as for the thermal transect and the Vaisala WXT510 status web page,
are also now using this technology.


		      DT3155 Framegrabber Driver

In early July it was discovered that the framegrabber driver and thus
the SAOguider had quit working.  It had worked fine with the 2.6.12
and 2.6.14 kernels, but did not work at all with 2.6.16 or newer
ones.  The driver would build and install fine and generated no
runtime errors, but SAOguider and other framegrabber tasks would hang
up.  A key hint to the root of the problem came from the fact that
one of the test programs that comes with the DT3155 driver did work.
There are two ways to grab frames from the DT3155:  by polling the
card until it's in a frame-ready state or by having the card generate
interrupts when frames are ready.  The SAOguider and our software use
the interrupt mode while the test program that worked used the polling
mode.  Thus the driver and card were fine, but the card was not
generating interrupts for some reason.  Checking /proc/interrupts
while attempting to grab frames in interrupt mode confirmed this to be
the case.  Further testing found that the more recent kernels were
configured to use the more modern IO-APIC interrupt controller for all
interrupts while the older ones used the legacy XT-PIC mode for the
DT3155.  Forcing the newer kernels into the legacy XT-PIC mode via the
'noapic' boot parameter got the DT3155 working again in all modes.
Under a heavy interrupt load there can be a performance penalty
when using the XT-PIC mode, but it's not enough to be a concern for
us.  The machines such as hoseclamp that host DT3155 cards have had
their boot configurations modified to include the 'noapic' flag and
the SAOguider now works properly. 


	       Update of Hacksaw to a Rackmount Server

With a single cpu and less than 1 GB of RAM (due to DT3155 driver
limitations), hacksaw was buckling under the demands of running 
dozens of TCS servers, continuous logging and monitoring of
TCS systems, and the dozens of windows that operators use to control
everything.  Splitting the TCS server duties off to a dedicated
machine would go a long way towards improving the responsiveness of
the operator's desktop.  Since we've had very good luck with our
mmto.org rackmount server from ASL, we acquired a similar system to
become the new hacksaw.  It has dual dual-core opteron cpus, 2 GB of
RAM, and 3 TB of RAID5 disk spanning 11 drives plus a 12th as a hot
spare.  This will provide us plenty of room for our growing data
archiving and analysis needs.

The new machine was deployed as hacksaw and the former hacksaw renamed
to yggdrasil during the last week of August.  This gave us some
engineering time to iron out the kinks and weed out implicit and
explicit assumptions about hostnames and where operators are logged
in.  This mostly involved boot configurations for vxworks crates, but
also the cell rerr window and the operator log screenshot mechanism.
These issues were successfully worked around and we now seem to be
running smoothly with the new configuration.  We are now in a position
to deal with a failure of a control room computer much more smoothly
and easily.  Any one of them will be able to run all TCS interfaces
nearly equally well.  In the case of a failure of hacksaw, the
mmto.org server downtown can easily be reconfigured on the fly to
respond to hacksaw's ip number and run all of the TCS services that
hacksaw hosts.  


    DONUT: A Method for Wavefront Sensing using Out-of-Focus Stars

A recent paper by A. Tokovinin and S. Heathcote (astro-ph/0606388)
describes a method for measuring wavefront aberrations using single
images of out-of-focus stars.  The ability to do wavefront sensing
with single CCD frames and no extra hardware is a potentially very
powerful tool.  One obvious application for the MMT would be to
quickly measure aberrations across a megacam field.  The results of
that could then be analyzed to determine alignment errors between M1,
M2, and the WFC.  Another possible application would be continuous
wavefront sensing for f/9 using one of the existing guider cameras.

The authors made available an IDL implementation of this method which
we have been trying out.  A screenshot is shown in Figure 2.  It seems
to work well, is easy to use, and is easily modified to support the
MMT's optical specifications.  A drawback of this method is that its
iterative nature makes it somewhat computationally intensive.
However, we have found that even the IDL implementation only takes at
most a few seconds to converge on a solution.  During engineering time
in September we hope to take data at f/9 and f/5 to compare results
between DONUT and our existing Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensors.

Figure 2 (Screenshot-DONUT GUI.png):  Screenshot of the DONUT
wavefront sensing GUI as provided by A. Tokovinin.  The image on the
left is an observed out-of-focus star and the image on the left is
the best-fit model.  The model consists of a 21-term Zernike
polynomial to describe the wavefront errors plus a Gaussian seeing
blur.  The number of Zernike terms is configurable and the best-fit
coefficients for the most commonly used terms are shown in the bottom
row of the GUI.


      Making a Low-End SBIG CCD Into a High-Speed Seeing Camera

Measuring seeing with a DIMM or similar instrument requires a detector
that is capable of taking exposures short enough to "freeze" the
atmosphere as much as possible.  For a standard DIMM short enough is
generally 5-10 ms.  This is possible with inexpensive CCDs with
mechanical shutters, but the turnaround time between exposures is
often of order a few hundred ms or more.  This is fine for determining
seeing from a two aperture DIMM, but better temporal sampling is
required to fully take advantage of a multi-aperture Hartmann-DIMM.  

A solution would be to leave the shutter open and read the CCD out
continuously.  This way the exposure time would be limited by the
readout speed of the CCD and there would be continuous sampling from
exposure to exposure.  The resulting image would have long strips for
each aperture.  Atmospheric turbulence parameters can then be derived
from the RMS deviations from the average strip positions.  The
continuous sampling would make it possible to bin the strips to
determine exposure time corrections.  

CCD cameras from SBIG provide the capability of reading out while
exposing, a feature widely used by amateur astronomers to do drift
scan imaging.  We obtained the smallest SBIG camera, the ST-402, since
it has all of the sensitivity and features of the larger cameras and
we don't need a large field.  As a bonus the camera comes with an
internal RGB+Clear filter wheel making color imaging possible.  A
sample image taken during software testing is shown in Figure 1.  The
software to do the continuously exposed readout is mostly completed
and we hope to do some on-sky testing of it this fall.

Figure 3 (st402.png):  A sample image created by taking R, G, and B
images of equal exposure time with a ST-402 camera.  


	      OS and Software Updates for Linux Machines

All of the mountain machines with the exception of yggdrasil have been
upgraded from Fedora Core 4 to 5.  It and mmto.org will be updated
later in September.  Two floating licenses for IDL 6.3 were purchased
for observatory use and IDL installed on all of the observatory's
linux workstations.  


 IDL Tool for Visualizing and Analyzing the Thermal Properties of the
			    Primary Mirror

Betty Stobie has developed an IDL visualization program to:

      - read E-series thermocouple values from a file
      - plot the values for the sets of thermocouples in the front, middle, and
	back plates
      - select which of the sets to plot and control the temperature
	range for the plots
      - fit the front, middle, and back values with 9 coefficient
	Zernike polynomials
      - display the fitted surfaces for each plate
      - calculate and display the focus correction predicted by FEA
	modeling done by T. Pickering.
      - output all fitted results to the designated log files
      - print view of the raw data display or the fitted image display by
	creating .png or .eps files

The user may select the desired thermocouple data file to read or process
a list of data files where a timer controls the delay between the reading 
of each file in the list.  Remaining items to implement include:

      - read the thermocouple values from the cell mini-server on
	hacksaw.  The timer will control the delay between reads of the socket.
      - create a save file so that draw_temp can run in the IDL virtual
	environment which does not require an IDL license.

Screenshots of the raw data and surface fit displays are shown in
Figures 2 and 3.

Figure 4 (draw_old.png): Screenshot showing the raw data display.  The
outer circle denotes the front plate, the middle the mid plate, and
the inner circle the back plate.  Clicking on a thermocouple position
will display the temperatures at that position in the 3 plates along
with their deviations from the mean mirror temperature.

Figure 5 (image_old.png): Screenshot showing the surface fit display.
When the cursor is moved within one of the three images, the
calculated temperature from the fit at that position is displayed.

			    Committee Work

Betty Stobie serves on the Local and Program Organizing Committees for
the Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems Conference (ADASS
XVI) to be held in Tucson at the La Paloma Resort October 15-18, 2006.
During the last two months she has been responsible for the selection
and planning of all conference catering including the opening
reception, morning and afternoon breaks, box lunches, and the
conference banquet.  She also assisted in the development of the
conference logo and poster, voted for the selection of the financial
aid recipients, voted for the contributed oral program from among the
requested oral presentations, and reviewed the Birds of a Feather and
focus demonstration proposals.

Betty also serves on the International Astronomical Union Flexible Image
Transport System Working Group (IAU FITS WG).  However, she did not
attend the August FITS Working Group Meeting as it was held at the IAU
Conference in Prague.


	     Online Observer Catalog Submission Webpage.

A new observer catalog submission webpage is now online on the MMT
website for observers to utilize. This tool will help observers submit
their existing catalogs or generate new catalogs from scratch. The
page allows for observers to type in a target name (such as Vega or
M45) and have that target's RA, DEC, and proper motion be
automatically generated and added to the catalog.  This works by
making a connection under-the-hood (using a combination of Ajax &
SOAP) to the SIMBAD database. The catalog format is interchangeable
with other Steward Observatory telescopes so even non-MMT observers
can also utilize this tool to generate their own catalogs if desired.
The URL is http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/catalogs/.


		    HORIZONS Ephemerides TCS Tool

To help make tracking non-sidereal targets easier, a new tool has been
developed for the MMT Telescope Control System.  The MMT Horizons
Ephemerides tool accepts a name of a non-sidereal object and
establishes a connection behind the scenes (using PHP CURL & Ajax) to
NASA JPL's Solar System Dynamics database to generate a 1 minute
interval ephemeris for any desired time span.  Modifications have been
made to the mount crate to accept this new ephemeris table and to
perform the interpolation of the ephemeris table.


