			    All-Sky Camera

Work done to date on the MMT all-sky camera was presented at the SPIE
conference in the form of a paper, a talk, and a poster.  The work was
presented again at the MMT Science Symposium in the form of a talk and
poster.  The paper and poster are available on the mmto.org website.  


		      F/5 Open Loop Corrections

The open loop tools for f/5 were calibrated over the spring to
compensate for the broken tangent rods in the f/5 cell.  After the
cell was repaired, the tools needed recalibration since the position
of the mirror within the cell has changed by at least a couple of
millimeters.  We hoped to get some engineering data to do the
recalibration, but the early onset of the monsoon prevented it.
Fortunately, we were able to get on the sky long enough to get one WFS
session in.  This provided enough information to recalibrate the
zeropoints within the hex_predict tool.  More information is required
to determine whether the elevation-dependent terms have changed
significantly.  


			Logging of Seeing Data

The telstat monitor, the WFS software, and the SAO guider have been
modified to take advantage of the new seeing server.  The WFS software
updates the value of wfs_seeing whenever a WFS frame is analyzed.  The
guider updates the value of guider_seeing whenever it calculates the
FWHM of a guide star.  The telstat display now shows both seeing
values.  The values are kept separate because the WFS seeing
determination is more accurate and is not susceptible to systematic
effects like telescope focus or collimation.  The guider seeing is not
as accurate, but updates more frequently.  Systematic deviation from
the WFS seeing can be a useful indicator of the telescope going out of
focus.  We are working with the AO group to have them update our
seeing server with the values they determine with their system.  These
will provide accurate and frequent measurements that will allow us to
do site characterization at a level that we haven't been able to do
before.  


		       OS and Computer Upgrades

Fedora Core 5 has been installed on several machines downtown.  They
were all upgraded in situ from Fedora Core 4 using the 'yum' utility.
This method, while not officially support by Fedora, has proven to
work very well and is much faster than booting into a special install
program.  It also allows a machine to be used during the upgrade
process and can easily be done remotely.  The rpm packages that are
still maintained in-house have been rebuilt and tested on the upgraded
machines.  Upgrades of mountain machines will commence in late July.  

A new server machine was ordered to take the place of hacksaw.  It
will be a dual-processor rackmount machine with a large RAID5 array
similar to the mmto.org server.  The current hacksaw is becoming
somewhat bogged down by running all of the network services and data
logging/archiving tasks as well as most of the operator's TCS guis.
Putting the network services, databases, and data archives on the
rackmount machine should free up the operator's workstation
considerably.  We plan to deploy the new server over summer shutdown
which should give us plenty of time to test and debug the new
configuration. 
