			    All-Sky Camera

On March 24 the all-sky camera was installed permanently and brought
on-line.  Other than a few control interface quirks that have to be
worked around and a malfunctioning enclosure heater that had to be
disconnected, the camera system has worked extremely well.  The
automatic iris control does a good job of allowing the camera to
produce useful images even when the bright sun or moon is shining
right into the camera.  Other all-sky cameras such as CONCAMs do not
operate at all under a bright moon, let alone during the day.  Under
dark conditions the camera is at least as sensitive as a perfectly
dark-adapted human eye and has a magnitude limit of 6.0-6.5 mag.  The
camera is quite red-sensitive, too, so red stars down to 7th mag are
easily detected.

Figure 1 shows a representative image from a clear, moonless night.
The Milky Way is easily visible rising in the east, Jupiter is the
bright object in the southwest, and the Big Dipper is setting in the
northwest.  The camera is sensitive enough to detect zodiacal light
all along the ecliptic, though it may not show up well in hardcopy
printouts.  The gegenschein is just to the right of the head of
Scorpius in this image.

After the camera was mounted, a set of images were run through DAOfind
to detect and centroid stars.  The resulting lists were then
cross-correlated with a catalog of bright stars to build a coordinate
transformation that maps altitude and azimuth to image coordinates.
This transformation is used to label the cardinal directions in each
image and to plot where the MMT is pointing at the time the image is
taken.  The camera is pointing within a degree of true zenith, but is
rotated 10.2 deg west of true north.  The enclosure cuts the image off
at 15 degress elevation so we're not losing too much compared to, say,
a dome enclosure.  The image distortions within the visible field are
quite mild.  A third-order polynomial is used to convert zenith angle
to radius in the image, though the deviation from linear is only a few
percent even for an elevation of 20 degrees.  The coordinate
transformation, and thus the mounting of the camera, appears to be
quite stable over time.

The telstat display in the control room was upgraded to better support
displaying sky camera images.  The animated .gif files that are
continually created are 15-17 MB in size and the old telstat computer
did not have enough memory to handle displaying them in a browser.
The new telstat computer is a Pentium-4 machine running linux
(http://telstat.mmto.arizona.edu) that will also control the seeing
monitor when that comes on-line.  A dual-head video card and a second
LCD monitor were obtained and installed so that operators and
observers each have their own telstat display.  The telstat web pages
have been modified to use the SOAP protocol to update the displayed
data which is much more efficient and reliable than doing periodic
reloads of the whole page.  Sky camera images and movies are now
displayed on the telstat page in the lower right and left-hand
corners, respectively.  The images are updated every 10 seconds while
the movies are updated every 60 seconds since they are fairly large.
The latest image, movie, and archived day and night movies are also
available at http://skycam.mmto.arizona.edu/.

Figure 1 (image_0001895.png):  Dark sky image taken with the all-sky
camera.  A red cross near the Big Dipper marks where the MMT was
pointing at that time. 


	   Open-loop Temperature and Elevation Corrections

The new automated wavefront sensing tool that was put into use
starting in early March logs hexapod coordinates, elevation, and OSS
temperatures after every round of corrections has been applied.  The
resulting database of known good hexapod positions makes it possible
to look for correlations with elevation and temperature without taking
up engineering time doing special observations.  The three hexapod
coordinates affected most by gravity and temperature changes are Z
(focus), Y, and Tilt_X.  There should be no systematic effects on the
other three coordinates and none are found in the data at any
significant level.  No significant correlation is found between Y or
Tilt_X and average OSS temperature, either.  The focus data is
modeled by a surface of the form:

Focus (um) = a*sin(El) + b*T + c

where El is the elevation in degrees and T is the average OSS
temperature in degrees C.  The most WFS data was obtained while in the
Hecto configuration and the fit to that data nets the following
results:

a =  1121 +/- 48.6 um
b = -37.8 +/-  1.6 um/C
c = 13977 +/- 43   um

The data and best-fit surface are shown in Figures 2, 3, and 4.  The
sine coefficient and zeropoint are fairly consistent with previous
determinations, but the temperature coefficient is almost half of the
predicted value.  This may be part of the explanation why our attempts
to correct for temperature effects have not worked well in the past.
This discrepancy is not yet well-understood.  One thought was that the
focus offsets that we use to help correct for spherical aberration may
be skewing results.  However, combing through the logs and correcting
hexapod positions for applied spherical corrections results in much
larger scatter around the fit with no apparent correlation with
temperature.  Work is on-going to better understand the effects of
bending defocus into the primary, both from our application of
corrective forces and from forcing due to temperature
non-uniformities.

The different optical configurations of MegaCam and SWIRC require
different M1-M2 distances than Hecto which translate to zeropoint
offsets in the above fit.  Fixing the temperature and elevation
coefficients to their best-fit Hecto values and fitting zeropoints to
the MegaCam and SWIRC data separately gives:

c(MegaCam) = 13547 um
c(SWIRC)   =  9386 um

These numbers were then used to build a simple hex_predict script that
can be used to configure the hexapod to the predicted focus for the
current elevation and OSS temperature.  This is especially useful for
setting up for evening sky flats.  Focusing for sky flats previously
required educated guesswork by the telescope operator.

The effects of gravity on hexapod Y and Tilt_X are independent of
instrument configuration and are modeled by a function of the form:

Position = a*cos(El) + b

For Tilt_X the best-fit parameters to the entire set of March/April
WFS logs are:

a = 219 +/- 6 arcsec
b = 278 +/- 3 arcsec

For Y they are:

a = 2288 +/- 81 um
b = 1457 +/- 44 um

For f/5, the ratio of Y translation to Tilt_X for zero-coma moves is
9.45 which is very close to the ratio of these cosine coefficients.
Thus, gravitational sagging of the front-end with f/5 installed maps
almost completely into image motion with very little residual coma.
This is actually not a coincidence.  The front-end was originally
designed to self-compensate in this way with f/5 installed as
described in the final conceptual design "Red Books" from SGH dated
back to 1990.  Results of the Y and Tilt_X fits are shown in Figures 5
and 6.

Figure 2 (eltemp.eps):  3D plot of the best-fit surface to focus as a
function of elevation and average OSS temperature.  

Figure 3 (elevation.eps):  Same as Figure 2, but oriented to show
elevation dependence alone. 

Figure 4 (temperature.eps):  Save as Figure 2, but oriented to
accentuate OSS temperature dependence.  

Figure 5 (tiltx.eps):  Plot of hexapod Tilt_X versus elevation.

Figure 6 (transy.eps):  Plot of hexapod Y translation versus elevation.
