			   F/5 WFS Computer and Hardware

The f/5 WFS has again proven to be a rather cantankerous beast.  The
PixeLink acquisition camera finally became so unreliable that we
stopped using it altogether.  The problem appears to be with the
IEEE1394 interface on the computer.  The computer reports errors
loading the IEEE1394 driver and the camera works fine plugged into
other computers.  Its very low sensitivity has always limited its
usefulness, however, so we decided it wasn't worth the effort of
replacing the computer's motherboard just to support it.  We tested a
StellaCam low-light video camera such as the one used in the All-Sky
Camera and found that even in its default mode of medium gain and no
integration it was much more sensitive than the PixeLink.  Stars down
to 10th magnitude were easily visible even when massively out of
focus.  Adjusting gain and integration time via the StellaCam's RS232
interface allowed us to easily reach 13th and 14th magnitude stars.
We then went ahead and replaced the PixeLink with a StellaCam.  Some
modifications were required within the WFS to run video and RS232
cables out to the east drive arc and to provide 12V DC power to the
camera.  There was an existing 12V DC power cable that was previously
used by the science camera's filter wheel that we decided to use for
the StellaCam.  It should have been sufficient in terms of current and
was already wired up and switched through the LabJack.  However, we
found that having the StellaCam powered up made the WFS computer
unstable.  The WFS computer has not crashed since we decided to power
off the StellaCam and leave it alone.  We will revisit this problem in
early February while f/5 is off the telescope.

In early December before we did any of the engineering to support the
StellaCam, it was discovered that the hard drive in the WFS computer
had died completely.  A replacement drive with a recent disk image
installed on it was provided by John Roll.  This was installed and
used successfully.  In the course of trying to debug the WFS
computer's instability we migrated to booting the WFS computer over
the network.  While this did not ultimately fix the stability problem,
it did significantly improve the performance of the WFS computer and
sped up the boot time by at least a factor of two.  It also greatly
simplifies backing up the WFS computer and provides a means of easily
managing and versioning known good configurations.  This is well worth
the added complexity of requiring a second computer to be running and
configured to support the WFS computer.  We are currently using the
f/9 WFS computer on the east drive arc for this purpose, but may
migrate this to hacksaw or hoseclamp in the future.

Modifications were made to the software on the WFS computer to have it
automatically start the required servers when it boots up.  Previously
the operators had to start them manually.  


		       M2 Open Loop Corrections

Due to poor conditions on the engineering night of December 19, we
were not able to make dedicated observations for checking our M2 open
loop (a.k.a. ElColl) corrections.  It became clear over the following
week that the sag term (M2 Y translation vs. elevation) had changed
significantly since we had last measured it in mid-November.
Analyzing the hexapod positions logged by the WFS after corrections
have been applied found that the sag term has indeed changed and that
there is also a significant temperature dependence that we were not
correcting for previously.  Figure 1 shows the WFS data and elcoll
fits projected to show the temperature dependence.  Figure 2 shows the
same information projected to show the elevation dependence.  The
slope of the temperature dependence is 115 microns per degree C.  The
elevation dependence is much closer to linear versus the more purely
cos(el) seen before.  Given the fairly large amount of scatter in the
data it's not clear how significant this result is.  The Z (focus)
component of elcoll has not changed significantly and the model
determined in November did a reasonably good job of predicting the
focus position in December.  There is even larger scatter in the focus
data due largely to primary thermal state. 

Figure 1 (transy_temp.ps):  Known good M2 Y positions as logged by the WFS (red
crosses) during the last two weeks of December 2005 plotted with
ElColl fits determined from dedicated observations during November
2005 engineering time (green dashes) and by fitting a model to the WFS
data (blue dashes).  The data is projected to most clearly show the
temperature dependence seen in the December WFS data. 

Figure 2 (transy_el.ps):  Same as Figure 1, but projected to show the elevation
dependence.  


  Wavefront Aberrations Due to Primary Mirror Temperature Variations

In the past we have performed experiments to see how focus (as
measured by a WFS) would change as the temperature of the OSS changed.
In the course of doing so we saw large variations (~100 um) in focus
on short timescales (0.5 to 1 hour) that did not correlate with any
observed ambient or OSS temperature change.  Upon further analysis it
was found that the focus changes did correlate with changes in the
thermal structure within the primary mirror.  In hindsight it was
obvious that this would be the case.  The softest circularly-symmetric
bending mode of the primary mirror (the so-called "cone mode") does
not correspond to any single zernike mode that we measure.  Instead,
it projects into all circularly-symmetric zernike modes and most
strongly into focus and spherical aberration.  So whenever we'd see
spherical aberration change as temperature gradients in the mirror
change, the focal length of the primary would be changing at the same
time.

On the night of November 21 we performed another experiment where we
pointed at a star near the celestial pole to remove any elevation
dependence and continuously took WFS data over a span of about 6
hours.  For the first hour or so we just ran the thermal system
normally.  Then we cranked the setpoint up to warm the mirror.  After
about 3 hours we lowered it to start cooling the primary again.
Figure 3 shows the results of modeling the primary's thermal
structure.  The structure in each plate is modeled by a surface
described by a nine mode Zernike polynomial.  This should in principle
simplify relating temperature structure variations to variations in
figure at the mirror surface.  Figure 4 shows the corresponding modes
of wavefront aberrations measured by the WFS.  Note how the focus
changes by over 100 um within an hour of changing the thermal system's
setpoint.  The variations in measured focus correlate most closely
with the focus term in the mid-plate fits.  The spherical term in the
mid-plate also correlates with the measured spherical, though
there is a phase shift in the peak that is not completely understood.
Engineering time in mid-January 2006 will be used to further explore
these issues with the goal of building an open loop tool that measures
the primary's thermal state and applies corrections based on the
predicted wavefront errors.

Figure 3 (fit_plots.ps): Results of Zernike polynomial fits to the
temperature structure of the primary mirror over the course of the
night of November 21, 2005.  In all plots the red data corresponds to
the front plate, green to the mid plate, blue to the back plate, and
magenta to the average temperature.  The temperatures all come from
the cell's E-series thermocouples.

Figure 4 (zern_plots.ps):  Results of wavefront measurements over the
same period of time shown in Figure 3.  The large scatter in the data
is due to the fairly poor seeing conditions (~1.5") during the time
the data was taken.  Still, the variations in focus, spherical, and
0-degree astigmatism are very clear.  


