		   Mount Servos and Mount Computer

Work continues on the mount servos.  Servo algorithms designed as
block diagrams via Simulink are converted to C code by Simulink:Real
Time Workshop and them compiled using our linux hosted cross
compilers.  This code is then linked with the mount code and run under
VxWorks.  We use the same code image on both the downtown simulator
and the actual mount computer on the mountain.

Tests on the mountain exposed one bug (we were updating encoder
information at 100 Hz instead at the 1000 Hz rate that we run the
servos at), which was quickly fixed.  We were then able to move the
mount using the new servos, but not in a completely satisfactory
manner.  The motor command output shows substantial high frequency
noise, which we have traced to a malfunctioning differentiator block
being used to calculate commanded velocities from commanded positions.
This can be fixed by the addition of a suitable low pass filter after
the differentiator.

Servo response when performing real moves with the telescope do not
match the response from simulated moves using a model of the telescope
transfer function.  This indicates that the telescope model (transfer
function), for which the current servo model was designed, does not
match the response of the current telescope configuration.  This
indicates that the telescope itself and/or the control system hardware
has changed.  It also suggests that the servo model may be more
sensitive to the exact telescope configuration than we anticipated.
We do not believe that our basic model is flawed, it simply needs to
be "tuned" (i.e. parameters adjusted) in order to obtain stable
performance.  We will need to investigate how sensitive the model is
to actual telescope configuration and whether one set of parameters
will have enough latitude to allow operation of the telescope in all
configurations.


		     Remote Protocol Improvements

The mount, hexapod, and cell computers all support distributed
computing via what we call the "remote protocol".  This is a simple
ascii-based protocol that can be manipulated using a telnet session
for diagnosis, and which supports our logging system, the various
miniservers, and most of the graphical user interfaces used by the
operators.  Recent efforts to design a new set of graphical user
interfaces for the cell computer exposed throughput limitations of
this protocol.  In particular we discovered a limit of approximately
10 of our "all" commands per second communicating to any of the
vxworks crates.

We have found that the delay is happening in the TCP protocol itself,
and in many cases the crate is simply waiting for a TCP ACK packet
to be sent by the client end of the connection.  We can make and
break approximately 1000 connections per second, even with our
older m68k processor based vxworks systems; two orders of magnitude
more than we can manage when actually moving data.  The addition of
output buffering has given a substantial improvement: we can now
make over 30 connections involving the "all" command in a second.
Now that we understand the nature of the throughput throttling it
is likely that we will be able to make additional improvements.
However, 30 connections per second is entirely adequate for our current
needs and anticipated future use.


	  Integrating Open-Loop Models Into Hexapod Control

We commissioned a new approach to hexapod operation during the past
two months.  This approach integrates the functionality of the
'hex_predict' script directly into the hexapod control software.  This
gives the hexapod the ability to configure itself automatically for
the current elevation, OSS temperature, and instrument configuration.
The key architectural change came in how we handle corrections to this
basic model.  Rather than having all corrections be applied using a
single set of relative commands, we now define a set of individual
offsets that cover the most common and anticipated sources of
corrections.  

This new approach allows much easier monitoring and logging of
contributions to the final hexapod position from different sources,
such as thermal and elevation effects, guiders, instruments, and
wavefront sensors.  This approach will also make it much easier for
instruments to apply focus offsets to account for changes to their
internal configuration.  SWIRC and PISCES, for example, have large
focus offsets between filters which in the past required manual
intervention by the operator or observer to handle.  These focus
changes as well as those applied by the WFS to help correct for
spherical aberration greatly complicated off-line analysis of logged
hexapod data.

Some specific tasks that were part of this effort included:

   - Tim recalculated parameters for the open loop model that is now
   included in the hexapod control software using data from the most
   recent f/9 and f/5 runs.

   - Tom implemented new code in the hexapod crate, including position
   calculation from the offsets and automatic updating of OSS
   temperature and elevation corrections.  The remote protocol for the
   hexapod crate was expanded.

   - Duane created a web-based GUI to expose the new functionality.
   This GUI will replace the existing "hexgui" for normal nighttime
   operations, though "hexgui" is still appropriate for daytime
   engineering.  A "hexpods" web page had already been created to
   replace the "Pods" GUI.

   - Dallan has created a web-based "hexlimits" GUI.

   - Modifications were made to the setting server to accommodate the
   new instrument configuration parameters.  

   - Modifications were made to MySQL tables and miniserver scripts to log
   the new parameters.

   - New web pages were created and existing web pages modified to
   display the new offsets in tabular and graphical form.


		 Hexapod/Secondary support Debugging

Extensive analysis of f/5 hexapod background data was done by Brian
C., Ricardo O., and others to understand possible shifts in the
hexapod support system.  High resolution (1 Hz) hexapod data was
collected and analyzed to quantify hexapod behavior.  

Evaluation was also done of the f/9 hexapod and secondary following
the recent re-aluminization.  New software limits were mapped for this
hexapod.  Prior to this mapping it was thought that the f/9 hexapod
was unable to contact any part of the telescope hub.  However, it has
been shown that software limits are indeed necessary to prevent this
contact and are now implemented. 


			Engineering Web Pages

The following tasks were completed to create new or modify existing
engineering web pages:

    - The cell error log display, the "rerr" GUI, was converted to a
    ajax-enabled web page.

    - Pages were created to present thermal movies of primary mirror
    temperature data, creating images on-the-fly from E-series
    thermocouple data obtained from MySQL background logs.

    - Additional work has been done on XY scatterplot web pages for
    presenting MMT background log data to engineers and other end users.

    - Various web pages were created and modified for possible use on new
    control room monitors.  These web pages include weather,
    environmental, and systems status information.  Final layout for
    displays in these new monitors is underway.

    - Modifications were made to PHP scripts used to generate RRDTool
    images from RRDTool databases with the inclusion of additional
    parameters.

    - Additional functionality was added to the "Miniserver" and
    "xajaxMMT" PHP classes.  These modifications include new methods for
    communication with the cell crate using an ASCII protocol.  Work is
    underway by Skip to generate new cell GUI's to replace the existing
    windex GUIs.

    - PHP classes are also being developed to generalize the PHP/MySQL
    interface to background logs and for plotting of this background log
    data.

    - An inferred roof relative humidity is now being calculated and
      displayed for operator use.  In principle it should help
      determine whether the skin of the building may be cold enough to
      condense water.  However, it has become clear that we need a
      better measure of ambient dewpoint and a more carefully mounted
      temperature sensor on the building.


		      Windows Domain Controller

The new Windows Domain Controller server is now online. All remaining
MMT Windows users will be migrated onto the new domain over the next
few weeks. The domain controller provides a centralized mode of
administration and allows any MMT user to log into any Windows
computer on the MMT domain with their existing username and password.

All of the MMT's Autodesk Inventor files have been moved onto the new  
Windows server and these files are accessed using Autodesk's Vault  
software. The Vault provides a robust method for checking in-and-out  
files and maintaining appropriate permissions.

We are currently evaluating 'roaming profiles' which will permit  
Windows users to store their computer settings and 'My Documents'  
on the server instead of their desktop computer. This will give users  
their same 'desktop' regardless of which computer at the MMT they  
are logged into.

A centralized backup system for Windows desktops is currently being  
evaluated. This will provide Windows users with automatic backup of  
important documents onto the server on a regular basis.

Skip did some research into implementing LDAP authentication on our
linux machines.  This would in principle ease migrating user account
info between machines, allow integration of samba, system, and web
passwords, and allow integration with the Windows Domain Controller's
Active Directory as well as the UA's netid system.  However, allowing
both local and LDAP accounts on a machine created numerous
complications.  The showstopper is a bug in the GDM login manager that
most linux systems use that prevents LDAP-based users from logging in
at all.  We will further investigate whether the newly released Fedora
Core 6 helps with this issue. 


			 Catalog Enhancements

Since the roll-out of the new observer catalog submission tool, many  
changes and additions have been requested and implemented. A couple  
of the major enhancements are:

    - The ability for the observer to edit catalogs online after they
      have already been submitted.
    - Plotting catalog targets and graphing airmass.
    - Administration page for managing submitted catalogs.

Tests of the new interface to catalogs of non-sidereal objects were
performed on sky during engineering time.  We were able to
successfully acquire and track two different asteroids. 


		    SCCS Updates and Enhancements

Over the past two months Skip has made significant changes and
enhancements to the spectrograph control and image acquisition systems
for Blue and Red Channel.  This initial round of changes included:

    - Modifying exisiting SCCS GUI to split it up into a client and
      server so that multiple clients can connect to and control the
      spectrograph. 

    - Create a new ccdacq detector interface to support the new azcam
      interfaces to the science cameras.  The old vxworks-based ccd
      crate is now completely retired. 

    - Create a ccdacq instrument interface to Blue and Red Channel.
      This allows spectrograph information to be included in image
      headers and makes it possible to control the spectrograph from
      within IRAF.  It is now possible to script spectrograph
      behavior. 

    - Create a ccdacq telescope interface to the telstat SOAP server.
      This is a lot simpler and more robust than our previous
      telserver-based scheme of querying TCS information to include in
      image headers. 

These changes were commissioned and used successfully during the
September f/9 run.  After the September run, work was done by Skip,
Cory, Brian, and Dondi to implement computer control of the comparison
lamps that are used by Blue and Red Channel.  This involved, among
other things, resurrecting the SCCS parallel ports on the back of
GAITS, interfacing a digital I/O box to those ports, debugging
out-of-date and inaccurate documentation, implementing a ccdacq
interface to the digital I/O box via a lantronix, and modifying some
ccdacq tasks to automate comparison mirror and lamp control.  Now if
the observer runs the 'comps' command the requested lamps are turned
on and the comparison mirror inserted automatically, the images
acquired once the mirror is in place, and then the lamps are turned
off and the mirror removed when the task is complete.  The WFS
software was also modified to take advantage of this comparison mirror
automation.  These changes were commissioned successfully during the
October f/9 run.

Some other minor changes were made to ccdacq to prepare for the new
Red Channel camera that is due to arrive in early December.  The
changes involved moving some initialization code out of the client and
into the azcam server.  These changes were tested successfully and
used during the October f/9 run.


	       Primary Thermal Structure Modeling Tools

Betty has continued the development of IDL procedures to model the
thermal structure of the primary mirror.  The two main procedures are
'draw_temp' and 'batch_temp'.  The draw_temp procedure was developed
to run as an interactive GUI while batch_temp runs non-interactively.
In both cases the input may be from a file, a list of files, or the
thermocouple values may be taken directly from the cell miniserver on
hacksaw.  The output consists of log files and displays of the raw and
fitted data written to eps files.

Save files of the procedures were created so that they could run on
machines that do not have IDL licenses using the IDL Virtual
Environment.  However, this does not work in batch mode because the
IDL VM creates an interactive display that must be acknowledged before
the program will execute.  The main remaining feature to implement is
the modification to the batch_temp procedure so that it may be called
directly from another program such as a shell script.

Tim used these tools to analyze thermal data from the last f/9 to run
to see if they could explain the large focus shifts that were
observed.  The night of October 29, for example, showed deviations
from the open loop model of +/- 150 um in focus over the course of the
night.  Figure 1 shows the results of fits to the primary mirror's
thermal structure using batch_plot.  The first shows the results at
1:22 UT, the seconds at 4:25 UT, and the third at 8:29 UT.  The
magnitude of the changes in the focus error reported by batch_temp are
consistent with the observed focus changes.  However, the timing of
the measured and predicted focus errors don't quite match up.  This
behavior has been seen before when analyzing tempfoc engineering data.
This indicates that the actual temperatures in the glass are changing
faster than the E-series thermocouples can react.  Better agreement
was seen during the night of October 28 when the thermal conditions
were much more stable.  Work is ongoing to refine the
calibration of these tools and incorporate them into our existing open
loop model.  

Figure 1:  Results of analyzing primary mirror thermal structure
during the night of October 29.  The data were taken at 1:22 UT
(fit_01_22_28.eps), 4:25 UT (fit_04_24_59.eps), and 8:29 UT
(fit_08_29_10.eps).  Each plot shows the results of polynomial surface
fits to E-series temperature data for the front, mid, and back
plates.  The diametric gradients are determined directly from the fits
and the focus error is determined from the fits in combination with
FEA models.  


		      Analyzing Sky Camera Data

Betty has been experimenting with an IDL procedure to locate transient
events in all-sky camera data.  The procedure uses the Hough Transform
to look for linear features in difference images between successive
sky camera frames.  The program produces a log of detected events and
a composite image of all frames in which events were detected (Figure
2).  So far it is quite effective at detecting things like meteors and
planes when they're overhead.  Further work is needed to improve
detection of more point-like transients.  We should be able to detect
planes early enough to provide early warning of potential flyovers and
may be able to generate measures of hourly meteor rates that could be
scientifically interesting.

Tim has been experimenting with using sextractor to detect sources in
sky camera images, measure their fluxes, and subtract them off to
create sky background maps.  Figure 3 shows examples of such a sky
background map and a background-subtracted image.  The initial results
are very encouraging.  An easy first step will be to monitor the sky
background in the area surrounding the north celestial pole.  This
will provide some measure of how light pollution from Tucson is
affecting conditions on Mt. Hopkins.  The next step will be to select
and monitor patches of the sky that are relatively uncontaminated by
galactic or zodiacal light.  We will also want to monitor the position
of the moon to exclude heavily moonlit images from analysis.  Work is
ongoing to determine whether the source fluxes can be used to provide
a quantitative measure of cloud cover. 

Figure 2 (transients.png):  Example of a composite of images
containing detected transient events.  This image was created by
processing approximately 100 sky camera frames and clearly shows two
meteors and a plane. 

Figure 3:  Example of a sky background map (skyback.png) and
background-subtracted sky camera image (skymback.png) generated by
sextractor. 


		   The 16th Annual ADASS Conference

The 16th annual Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems Conference
was held at the Westin La Paloma October 15-18.  There were 290 attendees
and 185 papers presented.  Tom, Duane, Skip, Betty, Dallan, Tim, and
Grant all attended. 


			    Committee Work

Betty was a member of the Local Organizing Committee for ADASS and was
responsible for all catering.  She insures that there was ample
and tasty food for the the opening reception, evening banquet, daily
breakfasts, morning and afternoon breaks, and lunches without going
over budget.  As a member of the Program Organizing Committee she also
chaired one oral session and attended the annual POC business meeting.

She serves on the International Astronomical Union Flexible Image
Transport System Working Group (IAU FITS WG).  Along with most other
members of the working group she attended the FITS Birds of a Feather
Session at ADASS.
