		   Mount Servos and Mount Computer

Work continues on the mount servos.  Servo algorithms designed as
block diagrams via Simulink are converted to C code by Simulink:Real
Time Workshop and them compiled using our linux hosted cross
compilers.  This code is then linked with the mount code and run under
VxWorks.  We use the same code image on both the downtown simulator
and the actual mount computer on the mountain.

Tests on the mountain exposed one bug (we were updating encoder
information at 100 Hz instead at the 1000 Hz rate that we run the
servos at), which was quickly fixed.  We were then able to move the
mount using the new servos, but not in a completely satisfactory
manner.  The motor command output shows substantial high frequency
noise, which we have traced to a malfunctioning differentiator block
being used to calculate commanded velocities from commanded positions.
This can be fixed by the addition of a suitable low pass filter after
the differentiator.

Servo response when performing real moves with the telescope do not
match the response from simulated moves using a model of the telescope
transfer function.  This indicates that the telescope model (transfer
function), for which the current servo model was designed, does not
match the response of the current telescope configuration.  This
indicates that the telescope itself and/or the control system hardware
has changed.  It also suggests that the servo model may be more
sensitive to the exact telescope configuration than we anticipated.
We do not believe that our basic model is flawed, it simply needs to
be "tuned" (i.e. parameters adjusted) in order to obtain stable
performance.  We will need to investigate how sensitive the model is
to actual telescope configuration and whether one set of parameters
will have enough latitude to allow operation of the telescope in all
configurations.


		     Remote Protocol Improvements

The mount, hexapod, and cell computers all support distributed
computing via what we call the "remote protocol".  This is a simple
ascii based protocol that can be manipulated using a telnet session
for diagnosis, and which supports our logging system, the various
miniservers, and most of the graphical user interfaces used by the
operators.  Recent efforts to design a new set of graphical user
interfaces for the cell computer exposed throughput limitations of
this protocol.  In particular we discovered a limit of approximately
10 of our "all" commands per second communicating to any of the
vxworks crates.

We have found that the delay is happening in the TCP protocol itself,
and in many cases the crate is simply waiting for a TCP ACK packet
to be sent by the client end of the connection.  We can make and
break approximately 1000 connections per second, even with our
older m68k processor based vxworks systems; two orders of magnitude
more than we can manage when actually moving data.  The addition of
output buffering has given a substantial improvement: we can now
make over 30 connections involving the "all" command in a second.
Now that we understand the nature of the throughput throttling it
is likely that we will be able to make additional improvements.
However, 30 connections per second is entirely adequate for our current
needs and anticipated future use.


1) Inclusion of offsets in hexapod operation:
    A new approach to hexapod operation occurred during the past two
months.  All hexapod positions are now the result of up to ten
distinct types of offsets.  These offsets include:
     i) operator offsets.
    ii) base offsets,
   iii) instrument offsets,
   iv) wavefront sensor offsets,
    v) guider offsets,
   vi) OSS temperature offsets,
   vii) M1 temperature offsets,
   viii) flexure offsets,
   ix) M1 spherical offsets, and
   x) user offsets.

This new approach allows better monitoring and logging of contributions to
the final hexapod position from different sources, such as thermal and
elevation effects, guiders and wavefront sensors.  Instrument-specific
information is now included in calculation of these offsets.

    a) Tim calculated new parameters for secondary and instrument offsets.
 These parameters had previously been used in the "hexpredict" script.
    b) Tom implemented new code in the hexapod crate, including position
calculation from the offsets and automatic updating of thermal and
elevation offsets.  The remote protocol for the hexapod crate was
expanded.
    c) I created a web-based, hexoffsets GUI for normal operation and
engineering use.   This GUI will replace the existing "hexgui".  A
"hexpods" web page had already been created to replace the "Pods" GUI.
    d) Dallan has created a web-based "hexlimits" GUI.
    e) Modifications were made to the setting server to accommodate the
new instrument parameters.
    f) Modification was made to MySQL tables and miniserver scripts to log
the new parameters.
    g) New web pages were created and existing web pages modified to
display the new offsets in tabular and graphical form.

2) Hexapod/Secondary support debugging:
    a) Extensive analysis of f/5 hexapod background data is being done by
Brian C., Ricardo O., and others to understand possible shifts in the
hexapod support system.  High resolution (1Hz) hexapod data was
collected and analyzed to quantify hexapod behavior.
    b) Evaluation was also done of the f/9 hexapod and secondary following
the recent re-aluminization.   New software limits were mapped for
this hexapod.  Prior this mapping, it was thought that the f/9 hexapod
was unable to contact any part of the telescope hub.  Software limits
are now necessary to prevent this contact.

3) Ongoing creation of new and modification of existing engineering web
pages:
     a) cell error log display, the "rerr" GUI, was converted to a
ajax-enabled web page.
     b) web pages were created to present thermal movies of primary mirror
temperature data, creating images on-the-fly from E-series
thermocouple data obtained from MySQL background logs.
    c) Additional work has been done on XY scatterplot web pages for
presenting MMT background log data to engineers and other end users.
    d) Various web pages were created and modified for possible use on new
control room monitors.  These web pages include weather,
environmental, and systems status information.  Final layout for
displays in these new monitors is underway.
    e) Modifications were made to PHP scripts used to generate RRDTool
images from RRDTool databases with the inclusion of additional
parameters.
    f) Additional functionality was added to the "Miniserver" and
"xajaxMMT" PHP classes.  These modifications include new methods for
communication with the cell crate using an ASCII protocol.  Work in
underway by Skip in generating new cell GUI's to replace the existing
windex GUIs.
    g) PHP classes are also being developed to generalize the PHP/MySQL
interface to background logs and for plotting of this background log
data.
    h) An inferred roof dewpoint is now being calculated and displayed for
operator use.

4) Project management software, specifically "dotproject", has been
installed for evaluation by the MMT staff.

5) Software group attended the ADASS conference.  (Betty was on organizing
committee; Grant and Tim led field trips.)



*Windows Domain Controller*
------------------------------------
The Windows Domain Controller server is online. All remaining MMT  
Windows users will be migrated onto the new domain over the next few  
weeks. The domain controller provides a centralized mode of  
administration and allows any MMT user to log into any Windows  
computer on the MMT domain with their existing username and password.

All of the MMTs Autodesk Inventor files have been moved onto the new  
Windows server and these files are accessed using Autodesk’s Vault  
software. The Vault provides a robust method for checking in-and-out  
files and maintaining appropriate permissions.

We are currently evaluating ‘roaming profiles’ which will permit  
Windows users to store their computer settings and ‘My Documents’  
on the server instead of their desktop computer. This will give users  
their same ‘desktop’ regardless of which computer at the MMT they  
are logged into.

A centralized backup system for Windows desktops is currently being  
evaluated. This will provide Windows users with automatic backup of  
important documents onto the server on a regular basis.


*Catalog Enhancements*
---------------------------------
Since the roll out of the new observer catalog submission tool, many  
changes and additions have been requested and implemented. A couple  
of the major enhancements are:

    * The ability for the observer to edit catalogs online after they
      have already been submitted.
    * Plotting catalog targets and graphing airmass.
    * Administration page for managing submitted catalogs.



At the beginning of this period, I continued testing hexapod control.

During engineering at the telescope, I tested and commissioned
gspec gui changes to allow multiple clients to red/blue channel spectrograph,
the ccdacq detector interface to azcam science camera (red/blue channel),
the ccdacq instrument interface to red/blue channel spectrograph, and
the ccdacq telescope interface to telstat.

I also implemented computer control of comparison lamps,
(many thanks to Cory and Brian for their electronics work), and
made a ccdacq interface to the lamps.
This was tested and successfully used during a recent blue channel run.

During this period, I also investigated using LDAP for unix account passwords,
web page passwords, and samba account password.  The lack of LDAP support
in gdm was a show stopper for now.

I also made some minor changes to ccdacq to prepare for the new red channel.
The changes involved moving some initialization code out of the client and into
the server.  These changes were tested and used during a recent
blue channel run.

October 15-18, I attended ADASS conference in Tucson.

I have started working on replacing windx cell guis with php/ajax web pages.


Software Development

Draw_Temp and Batch_Temp

  I have continued the development of the IDL procedures draw_temp and
batch_temp.  The batch_temp procedure was developed to run in a non-
interactive environment.  Input may be from a file, a list of files,
or the thermocouple values may be taken directly from the socket on
hacksaw.  The output consists of log files and displays of the raw
and fitted data written to eps files.

  I created a save file of the procedures that may run on machines that
do not have IDL licenses using the IDL Virtual Environment.  However, 
this does not work in batch mode  because the IDL VM creates an interactive
display that must be acknowledged before the program will execute.

  The remaining feature to implement is the modification to the batch_temp
procedure so that it may be called directly from a c program or shell script.  

Transient_Search

  I have been experimenting with an IDL procedure to locate transient events
in the all sky camera data using the Hough Transform.  The program produces
a log of detected events (results.txt) and a composite of all frames in
which events were detected (transients.png).  The two files above were 
created by processing approximately 100 all sky camera frames.  There is
a great deal of potential for the all sky camera data.  The transient
procedure needs a great deal more development.  

Meetings:

  The 16th annual Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems Conference
was held at the Westin La Paloma October 15-18.  There were 290 attendees
and 185 papers presented.  I particularly paid attention to the many papers
on pipeline calibration (especially many papers from NOAO) and archives.

Committee Work:

  As a member of the Local Organizing Committee for ADASS I was responsible
for all catering.  I had to insure that there was ample and tasty food for the
the opening reception, evening banquet, daily breakfasts, morning and afternoon
breaks, and lunches without going over budget.  As a member of the Program
Organizing Committee I also chaired one oral session and attended the annual
POC business meeting.

  I serve on the International Astronomical Union Flexible Image Transport
System Working Group (IAU FITS WG).  I with most other members of the
working group attended the FITS Birds of a Feather Session at ADASS.
