		    Unified Network Authentication

The LDAP-based network authentication server that was deployed over
shutdown has continued to work well serving our linux workstations.  
MMT Windows user accounts on the Active Directory server (VAULT) are
now synchronizing with the Linux user accounts using LDAP.  This means
that if a user changes their password on a Windows machine, the
password will be automatically changed on the Linux machines for that
same user account. There are still a couple of Windows users in town
that still need to be migrated over to the Active Directory along with
most of the mountain staff's Windows desktops. Dallan will be
migrating these Windows users onto the AD in the next couple of weeks.
The samba configurations on the linux machines have been updated to
authenticate via LDAP (specifically, via AD) to help simplify file
sharing between windows, mac os x, and linux.  Samba previously
required its own password database which was painful to reliably keep
in sync with normal unix and windows passwords.   

We have also begun to migrate our web page authentication to use the
LDAP server via SSL.  Dokuwiki was the first service to migrate to the
new scheme.  Its installation was transferred from mmto.org to
hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu and its code base was updated to the current
version, 2007-06-26b.

LDAP authentication and the requirement for secure web connections
(SSL/HTTPS) were set up for the http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/ssl/
web directory.  The new dokuwiki installation is one directory under
this directory.  Efforts will continue to move the current
http://tcs.mmto.arizona.edu/ site into this more open, yet secure
LDAP/SSL directory.

A self-signed certification was created for use with OpenSSL on
hacksaw.  This certification is valid for one year.

The new dokuwiki installation was configured so that only one LDAP
authentication is required for user login.  A second login using
dokuwiki authentication was eliminated.


			 DT3155 Linux Driver

I started looking into modifications to the linux driver for the DT3155
framegrabber card.  Modifications are needed to the interrupt handling
and memory management so that this driver can be used efficiently on more
modern machines with multiple cpus and large amounts of ram.


-- Wind Sensor Display  & R.M. Young Miniserver:

The R.M. Young wind sensor, which was previously connected to a
console in the control room, was recently converted to connect to the
network using a Lantronix. To make use of the newly available data, a
new miniserver was created to make this data available online. A new
webpage was created to help visualize the wind direction, speed and
sensor location for this wind sensor as well as the other two existing
wind sensors (Viasala3 & 4). Unfortunately shortly after the page went
online, lightning struck both the R.M. Young and the Viasala4 taking
them offline. [screenshot attached in case we need to fill extra
space]

The 17th annual Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS)
Conference was held September 23-26 at the Kensington Town Hall in London,
U.K.  There were 315 attendees with 246 presentations including orals,
posters, demonstrations, birds-of-a-feather sessions, and tutorials.
Tim Pickering and Betty Stobie attended the conference presenting posters
on "Web-based Interfaces to Telescope Control Systems at the MMT" and
"Data Mining the MMT All-Sky Camera", respectively.  Betty also co-authored
a poster on "Proposed Changes to the FITS Standard" with the rest of the
IAU FITS Working Group Technical Panel.  As a member of the Conference
Program Organizing Committee Betty chaired the 7th Oral Session: Algorithms
and Image Processing II and attended the annual POC business meeting.

Betty serves on the IAU FITS Working Group and is a member of 5 person
Technical Panel to update the FITS Standard.  The Panel's recommended
revised Standard was made public in early September.  Betty has reviewed
the public comments for possible modifications to the document.  She
also attended the FITS Birds of a Feather Session at ADASS where the 
proposed changes were discussed.


Transient Search with the All-Sky Camera

From October 20th thru October 24th this year we experienced a spectular
Orionid Meteor Shower.  For the nights of October 20th and October 21st
the moon set early and there were few clouds making perfect conditions
for detecting meteors in the All-Sky Camera data with the transient search
program.  On October 20th from 00:12:04 until 05:14:38 MST 51 meteors were
detected (oct_19_meteor.fits, a composite of masked difference images 
contains the 29 brightest meteors) and on October 21st from 01:21:50 
to 05:26:33 MST 85 meteors were detected (oct_20_meteor.fits, also a 
composite of masked difference images contains the 38 brightest meteors 
and two aircraft).

1) Desktop Menu Items on yggdrasil, hoseclamp, and other MMT mountain
Linux machines.
    Work continued on adding desktop menu items to the "MMT" desktop menu
on the mountain Linux machines.  These desktop items will give the
telescope operators and daytime engineering staff easier access to
the various programs required for operating the telescope and support
systems.

   Submenus under the "MMT" pull-down menu include:
  1. Autoguiders
  2. Cell GUI's
  3. Hexapod and M2 GUI's
  4. Instrument GUI's
  5. MMTAO GUI's
  6. Mount GUI's
  7. Thermal System GUI's
  8. WFS GUI.

   Each of these submenus contain several menu items that launch the
related software.

   Separate menu items are also available for a 32-bit version of the
Firefox web browser for the operator's use, the WIS (a.k.a. the
"Operator's Log"), and a WIS screen capture tool.  The 32-bit version
web browser is required to display web pages that include Flash and/or
Java plug-ins.

   Individual Firefox profiles were set up for each web page that is
included as a menu item.  This approach allows each of these critical
web pages to be run as a separate process, reducing the
inter-dependency between web pages.  The profiles also "remember" user
preferences, such as size of the web browser window when the web page
is more recently displayed.  These profiles are shared between users
within the "mmtop" user group and between the mountain Linux machines.

    A new WIS screen capture tool has also been implemented and is
incorporated into the desktop menu items.

    Finally, additional menu items were created to launch a suite of
GUI's with one mouse click.   This includes the "vmount all" command
line command for mount GUI's and a new script for all the thermal
GUI's.

2) Dokuwiki update and LDAP/SSL conversion.

3) Benchmarking of common Ajax/HTML programming tasks on different
browsers and operating systems, and a comparison with Flex2.
   A comparison of different programming approaches to routine Ajax/HTML
update operations was made on different web browsers for Linux, Mac,
and Windows machines.  This comparison aims to improve the often
excessive CPU usage for web pages that contain highly dynamic data,
i.e., data that is changing at 1Hz or faster.  A MMT programming goal
is to have these web pages update at 1Hz.

   Different Ajax/HTML approaches were also compared to Flex2/Flash9
implementations of the same web pages.

   Preliminary results of this comparison were presented by Tim Pickering
at the ADASS conference in London in September.  More details results
may be presented at the SPIE conference on Astronomical Telescopes and
Instrumentation in Marseilles next summer.

4) Miniserver Update and Lightning Issues
    MySQL logging was consolidated into one Perl script,
/mmt/dataserver/mysql_updater, that is called from a cron job on
hacksaw.

   Further work was also done on accessing data from the /tcs shared
memory on hacksaw.  A PHP-based, "comet" back-end script,
comet_backend.php, was written that delivers new data from the /tcs
shared memory to web pages or other clients in XML, JSON, CGI, or the
MMT "all" format.  Server-push is used to send new data to the client
as soon as it becomes available.  The thermal transect is being
updated to use this back-end and to use Flex2 to improve its CPU
efficiency.

   Dallan P. created a new "young1" miniserver and logging framework for
the R.M. Young weather station.  However, this weather station was
completely destroyed from a direct lightning hit on Sept 17, 2007.

   The "vaisala4" Model WXT510 weather station had also been placed to
the west of the MMT observatory and a miniserver created for recording
its data.  This unit was also damaged by this same lightning strike. 
The unit has been repaired by the manufacturer.  The vaisala4 unit
will be re-installed on the west side of the MMT when additional
lightning protection is in place.

   Because of lightning concerns, the Yankee thermohygrometer, model
MET-2010, was removed from outside of the building and installed in
the chamber.  Web pages have been updated to reflect this new location

   Finally, the "roof" Temptrax digital thermometer probe, which records
a metal temperatures on the roof and is also used to compute a
relative humidity, has been removed until construction on the roof is
complete.

5) LOTIS Aluminization Software and Database Development.
    Under support of the LOTIS project, new software was written for
aluminization of 6.5-m mirrors that will be used by both the LOTIS
project and the MMT.  This software uses National Instruments LabVIEW
software to interface with an Agilent 34970A Data Acquisition Unit
(DAU) and a Measurement Computing PCI-DAS 6023 analog and digital I/O
board.  The Agilent DAU samples atmospheric pressure and aluminum
deposition rates within the aluminization bell jar.  The PCI-DAS
board measures outputs from the ten welders used to supply power for
the aluminization process.

   A graphical user interface (GUI) was created used LabVIEW to display
real-time aluminization data as well as a video feed of an image from
inside the belljar.

   MySQL logging of all aluminization data was implemented.  A web page
interface to this MySQL database was also created.  The web page
updates at 1Hz and displays the most recent data appended to the MySQL
database.  Images from the video feed are also logged at a 1-second
interval.

   The aluminization Windows computer was integrated into the Steward
system so that data and images can be seen via the internet.