			    Servo Support

We now have a stable framework to support the execution of
matlab/simulink generated models.  We can run both single rate
and multirate models on our x86 VxWorks system, using our
GCC cross compiler to handle the generated code, as we do
for VxWorks.  The model of interest is presently the elevation
servo controller.  In the future the model will include simulink
generated controllers for other axes as well.  We have developed
a number of telemetry facilities especially for the elevation
controller.  These automatically capture data used to characterize
(and analyze) the servos whenever we start a model, start the
drive, and slew to an object.  Captures can also be triggered
by manual commands.


		      Transverse Counterweights

We have now implemented and tested computer control of the
transverse counterweights.  For a long time these were run
simply by connecting a power supply to the motors and using
a switch to move them one way or the other.  A new controller
using Copley servo amplifiers was the next generation of
control and was commanded by a hand paddle (which may still
be used when desired).  We are now able to command motion
from the mount computer via the interlock subsystem
(aka the "26 volt rack").  The current GUI allows the
operator to move them in either direction, then stop them
when the encoded position is achieved.  A simple control
algorithm (too simple to call a servo) has been able to
achieve positions better than 0.10 unit on the arbitrary
0-100 position scale that we use, which is certainly better
than can be achieved by hand.  This type of control can easily
be extended (and will be) to also position the axial counterweights.
Once this is done, it would be possible to use our present balancer
GUI to manipulate the counterweights.


			 F/5 Wavefront Sensor

When the F/5 wavefront sensor was installed on October 5, we
discovered that it could no longer boot from the network boot image
that had worked previous to summer shutdown.  In fact, none of the
boot images that were known to work previously worked at all.  They
would either hang indefinitely or continuously reboot.  Nothing else we
tried worked, either.  

Thinking at this point that it was a hardware failure, we proceeded to
replace the on-board computer's motherboard.  We had intended to do
this over summer shutdown, but decided to postpone it until the floor
work was finished.  Upon installing the spare motherboard we
discovered that it didn't work at all with the on-board power supply.
Testing the spare motherboard with the spare power supply found that it did
work, but still ran into the same boot problems.  At this point we
decided to install the spare power supply as well.  This required some
modifications to the power supply's wiring which Ken van Horn carried
out with some help from Tom Gauron.  In the meantime, Tim Pickering
used the original motherboard as a test-bed to figure out how to get
the system running again.  Eventually, the system was brought back up
by configuring it to boot from the hard drive again.  This required
significant windows kung fu to remove the network boot tentacles, but
the system is now working well.

After the resurrected wavefront sensor was reinstalled for the hecto
run, it performed normally for the first couple nights.  However, for
some reason the image acquisition began to fail intermittently.  After
much testing it was found that it was the data transfer that was
hanging up, but we still don't know why.  Similar problems are
observed when transferring files via SMB or ftp.  However, ssh and scp
work fine for even very large transfers.  The workaround we applied
was to configure an ssh tunnel between the wavefront computer and the
computer running the WFS interface.  This only required a change to
one line of the interface code and has worked pretty well, though it
requires the tunnel to be reconfigured whenever the wavefront computer
is restarted.  Once the WFS is off the telescope we will investigate
further to try to determine and fix the root of this problem.  

Once everything was working, we were beset with several nights of
extremely poor seeing.  The telescope operator described the resulting
WFS images as frosted doughnuts.  The image frosted_doughnut.fits
shows an example of how bad it was.  The exposure time of this image
was only 1 second which further shows how turbulent it was.  For
reference, the image seeing_0.45.fits (5 second exposure) shows what a
WFS image looks like under 0.45" conditions.  To completely smear out
the WFS spots like that requires seeing of 10" or worse.


		    Unified Network Authentication

The LDAP-based network authentication system that was deployed over
shutdown has continued to work well serving our linux workstations.
MMT Windows user accounts on the Active Directory server (VAULT) are
now synchronizing with the linux user accounts using LDAP.  This means
that if a user changes their password on a Windows machine, the
password will be automatically changed on the Linux machines for that
same user account. There are still a couple of Windows users in town
that need to be migrated over to the Active Directory along with most
of the mountain staff's Windows desktops. Dallan will be migrating
these Windows users onto the AD in the next couple of weeks.  The
samba configurations on the linux machines have been updated to
authenticate via LDAP (specifically, via AD) to help simplify file
sharing between windows, mac os x, and linux.  Samba previously
required its own password database which was painful to reliably keep
in sync with normal unix and windows passwords.

We have also begun to migrate our web page authentication to use the
LDAP server via SSL.  Dokuwiki was the first service to migrate to the
new scheme.  Its installation was transferred from mmto.org to
hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu and its code base was updated to the current
version, 2007-06-26b.

LDAP authentication and the requirement for secure web connections
(SSL/HTTPS) were set up for the http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/ssl/
web directory.  The new dokuwiki installation has been placed under
this directory.  Efforts will continue to move the current
http://tcs.mmto.arizona.edu/ site into this more open, yet secure
LDAP/SSL directory.

A self-signed certification was created for use with OpenSSL on
hacksaw.  This certification is valid for one year.

The new dokuwiki installation was configured so that only one LDAP
authentication is required for user login.  A second login using
dokuwiki authentication was eliminated.


			 DT3155 Linux Driver

Skip has started looking into modifications to the linux driver for
the DT3155 framegrabber card.  Modifications are needed to the
interrupt handling and memory management so that this driver can be
used efficiently on more modern machines with multiple cpus and more
than 896 MB of RAM.


	     Wind Sensor Display  & R.M. Young Miniserver

The R.M. Young wind sensor, which was previously connected to a
console in the control room, was recently converted to connect to the
network using a Lantronix RS232-to-ethernet converter. To make use of
the newly available data, a new miniserver was created to make this
data available online. A new webpage was created to help visualize the
wind direction, speed and sensor location for this wind sensor as well
as the other two existing wind sensors (Viasala3 & 4). Unfortunately
shortly after the page went online, lightning struck both the
R.M. Young and the Viasala4 taking them offline (see screenshot). 


			      ADASS XVII

The 17th annual Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS)
Conference was held September 23-26 at the Kensington Town Hall in London,
U.K.  There were 315 attendees with 246 presentations including orals,
posters, demonstrations, birds-of-a-feather sessions, and tutorials.
Tim Pickering and Betty Stobie attended the conference presenting posters
on "Web-based Interfaces to Telescope Control Systems at the MMT" and
"Data Mining the MMT All-Sky Camera", respectively.  Betty also co-authored
a poster on "Proposed Changes to the FITS Standard" with the rest of the
IAU FITS Working Group Technical Panel.  As a member of the Conference
Program Organizing Committee Betty chaired the 7th Oral Session: Algorithms
and Image Processing II and attended the annual POC business meeting.

Betty serves on the IAU FITS Working Group and is a member of 5 person
Technical Panel to update the FITS Standard.  The Panel's recommended
revised Standard was made public in early September.  Betty has reviewed
the public comments for possible modifications to the document.  She
also attended the FITS Birds of a Feather Session at ADASS where the 
proposed changes were discussed.


	       Transient Search with the All-Sky Camera

From October 20th thru October 24th this year we experienced a spectacular
Orionid Meteor Shower.  For the nights of October 20th and October 21st
the moon set early and there were few clouds making perfect conditions
for detecting meteors in the All-Sky Camera data with the transient search
program.  On October 20th from 00:12:04 until 05:14:38 MST 51 meteors were
detected (oct_19_meteor.fits, a composite of masked difference images 
contains the 29 brightest meteors) and on October 21st from 01:21:50 
to 05:26:33 MST 85 meteors were detected (oct_20_meteor.fits, also a 
composite of masked difference images contains the 38 brightest meteors 
and two aircraft).


	       Desktop Menu Items on MMT Linux Machines

Work continued on adding desktop menu items to the "MMT" desktop menu
on the mountain Linux machines.  These desktop items will give the
telescope operators and daytime engineering staff easier access to
the various programs required for operating the telescope and support
systems.

   Submenus under the "MMT" pull-down menu include:
  1. Autoguiders
  2. Cell GUI's
  3. Hexapod and M2 GUI's
  4. Instrument GUI's
  5. MMTAO GUI's
  6. Mount GUI's
  7. Thermal System GUI's
  8. WFS GUI.

Each of these submenus contain several menu items that launch the
related software.

Separate menu items are also available for a 32-bit version of the
Firefox web browser for the operator's use, the WIS (a.k.a. the
"Operator's Log"), and a WIS screen capture tool.  The 32-bit version
web browser is required to display web pages that include Flash and/or
Java plug-ins.

Individual Firefox profiles were set up for each web page that is
included as a menu item.  This approach allows each of these critical
web pages to be run as a separate process, reducing the
inter-dependency between web pages.  The profiles also "remember" user
preferences, such as size of the web browser window when the web page
is more recently displayed.  These profiles are shared between users
within the "mmtop" user group and between the mountain Linux machines.

A new WIS screen capture tool has also been implemented and is
incorporated into the desktop menu items.

Finally, additional menu items were created to launch a suite of
GUI's with one mouse click.   This includes the "vmount all" command
line command for mount GUI's and a new script for all the thermal
GUI's.


		     Web Application Benchmarking

A comparison of different programming approaches to routine Ajax/HTML
update operations was made on different web browsers for Linux, Mac,
and Windows machines.  This comparison aims to improve the often
excessive CPU usage for web pages that contain highly dynamic data,
i.e., data that is changing at 1Hz or faster.  An MMT programming goal
is to have these web pages update at 1Hz.

Different Ajax/HTML approaches were also compared to Flex2/Flash9
implementations of the same web pages.

Preliminary results of this comparison were presented by Tim Pickering
at the ADASS conference in London in September.  More details results
may be presented at the SPIE conference on Astronomical Telescopes and
Instrumentation in Marseilles next summer.


		Miniserver Update and Lightning Issues

MySQL logging was consolidated into one Perl script,
/mmt/dataserver/mysql_updater, that is called from a cron job on
hacksaw.

Further work was also done on accessing data from the /tcs shared
memory on hacksaw.  A PHP-based, "comet" back-end script,
comet_backend.php, was written that delivers new data from the /tcs
shared memory to web pages or other clients in XML, JSON, CGI, or the
MMT "all" format.  Server-push is used to send new data to the client
as soon as it becomes available.  The thermal transect is being
updated to use this back-end and to use Flex2 to improve its CPU
efficiency.

Dallan P. created a new "young1" miniserver and logging framework for
the R.M. Young weather station.  However, this weather station was
completely destroyed from a direct lightning hit on Sept 17, 2007.

The "vaisala4" Model WXT510 weather station had also been placed to
the west of the MMT observatory and a miniserver created for recording
its data.  This unit was also damaged by this same lightning strike. 
The unit has been repaired by the manufacturer.  The vaisala4 unit
will be re-installed on the west side of the MMT when additional
lightning protection is in place.

Because of lightning concerns, the Yankee thermohygrometer, model
MET-2010, was removed from outside of the building and installed in
the chamber.  Web pages have been updated to reflect this new location

Finally, the "roof" Temptrax digital thermometer probe, which records
a metal temperatures on the roof and is also used to compute a
relative humidity, has been removed until construction on the roof is
complete.


	LOTIS Aluminization Software and Database Development.

Under support of the LOTIS project, new software was written for
aluminization of 6.5-m mirrors that will be used by both the LOTIS
project and the MMT.  This software uses National Instruments LabVIEW
software to interface with an Agilent 34970A Data Acquisition Unit
(DAU) and a Measurement Computing PCI-DAS 6023 analog and digital I/O
board.  The Agilent DAU samples atmospheric pressure and aluminum
deposition rates within the aluminization bell jar.  The PCI-DAS
board measures outputs from the ten welders used to supply power for
the aluminization process.

A graphical user interface (GUI) was created used LabVIEW to display
real-time aluminization data as well as a video feed of an image from
inside the belljar.

MySQL logging of all aluminization data was implemented.  A web page
interface to this MySQL database was also created.  The web page
updates at 1Hz and displays the most recent data appended to the MySQL
database.  Images from the video feed are also logged at a 1-second
interval.

The aluminization Windows computer was integrated into the Steward
system so that data and images can be seen via the internet.
