Instrument Rotator Software:

A significant amount of effort has been expended on
improving the instrument rotator software during this
time period.  We have made rotator limits persistent
so that the operators do not have to reenter them
after every software boot.  A number of features
have been added to avoid the need for the operators
to make calculations in their head involving position
angles.  A feature has been added to support a
spectrograph mode (also refered to as "Track at Zero")
where it is desired to maintain the instrument slit
nearly normal to the horizon, yet to have the
rotator actively tracking so as to be able to use
the autoguider.

(See figure for a snapshot of the new rotator GUI)

During the end of this time period, we experienced a
catastrophic failure of the incremental encoders on
the four motors driving the rotator.  This necessitated
reorganizing the servo code to allow the rotator to be
run using only the tape encoder.  This has turned out
to work very well, and the tape encoder has been
entirely reliable and robust.

GPS Clock and NTP Time:

As the first stage of an effort to improve telescope pointing,
we began an effort to use the NTP protocol to obtain a time
reference for the mount control software.  Since the mount
software runs under VxWorks, it was necessary to expend
substantial effort to adapt and test the publicly available
source for the ntpdate program.  Ntpdate as we have now
adapted it, runs well under VxWorks, and polls a list of
timerservers to obtain a 64 bits time value.  From this
list, a single server is selected based on a number of
criteria, including the network delay to that server,
and the advertised stratum of the server.  A stratum 1
server with a directly connected radio clock will be chosen
in preference to other servers. If the radio clock is
not available for any reason, this scheme offers a smooth
and transparent failover to another server.  This scheme
is now in use, and the mount currently synchronizes time
both on software boot, and again when slew to a new object 
is requested.  A time offset of 1 or 2 milliseconds is
typically obtained.  We also have modified the mount software
to allow the operators to introduce the current DUT correction.
