			  Seeing Statistics

The overall seeing during the Spring 2009 Observing season was
markedly worse than what we enjoyed last fall.  The median jumped from
0.68" to 0.88", the mean from 0.73" to 0.97", and the mode from 0.58"
to 0.73".  The histogram of seeing data for the entire trimester is
shown in Figure 1. 

The change in seeing conditions has everything to do with the weather which became
a lot more unsettled starting in late December.  Breaking the data out
into individual months (Figure 2) shows that February and April were
significantly more unsettled on average than January and March.
April, in particular, was marked by a steady procession of strong
frontal systems passing through every few days that, while dry,
brought along plenty of wind and cooler temperatures.  

Figure 1 (spring_09_total.pdf):  Histogram of Spring 2009 seeing data (corrected
to zenith).  Data was acquired using the f/5 and f/9 Shack-Hartmann
wavefront sensors.  

Figure 2 (spring_09.pdf): Spring 2009 seeing data broken down by
month.  


		    F/15 DM and NGS AO Operations

The f/15 DM system was used on the telescope twice during the Spring
2009 trimester: 14 nights in NGS mode in January and 4 nights each of
NGS and LGS time in March.  The first four nights of the January run
were wiped out entirely due to a winter storm and parts of several
other nights were also lost due to poor conditions.  The March run was
also plagued by poor weather with three nights lost entirely and most
other nights losing at least a few hours to conditions.  

For the most part the DM and NGS systems performed fairly well.  There
was a gap contamination event that occurred on the night of January 8
that was severe enough to cost the last three hours of that night.
The push-n-wiggle routine was applied to the DM the following day
which managed to reduce the effect of the contamination enough to get
the system working properly.  The maximum gap when the DM was pulled
against the reference body was still 40-43 microns and remained that
way for the remainder of the January and March runs.  This didn't
obviously affect the efficiency of operations, at least with NGS, but
appears to have done so for LGS.  It's also not very desirable to
stress the mirror by operating with that much contamination.  On April
16 a crew of MMTO staff assisted by Manny Montoya and Richard Sosa
from SO/LBTO removed the DM's shell to try and clean out the
contamination.  The process went very smoothly and helped acquaint
several MMTO staff members with the required procedures.  We ended up
with maximum gap when pulled against the reference body of less than
25 microns.  Thus we managed to safely remove the existing
contamination without introducing any new problems which is always a
risk when removing the shell.  

A number of AO software tasks were worked on during this time, however
the lack of on-sky engineering time due to the weather prevented most
of them from getting sufficient testing to allow them to be fully
deployed.  The two most important features that require more testing
are PID servo control of the DM and porting of the ability to
enable/disable the DM's real-time loop mode directly from the PC
reconstructor (PCR).  Currently, starting and stopping the AO loop
requires extra mouse-clicks to do before or after RT loop from the DM
control gui in addition to clicking close or open AO loop.  We hope to
get these capabilities fully tested and deployed during the Summer
2009 trimester. 


	   Assessing Mount and Hexapod Pointing Performance

After the mirror wash, we had one on-sky M&E night with f/5 installed
on April 8-9.  The time was used to finally fix some f/5 WFS issues
pertaining to newer versions of tcl/tk, take some pointing data, and
take some elcoll data.  

The f/5 WFS software issues stemmed from a tcl/tk script that was
inherited from John Roll that was used to perform most stage motion
and image acquisition tasks.  It was written in a way that works fine
with tcl/tk 8.4 or earlier, but breaks with tcl/tk 8.5.  It would have
taken significant rewriting and refactoring to make it compatible so
it was easier (and ultimately cleaner) to simply do away with it.
Where motion control commands are sent, the code was changed to send
network commands directly to the 'waveserv' motion control server.
The image acquisition commands are now carried out by executing a
simple, 8-line shell script that takes an exposure time in seconds and
a filename as arguments.  

Other WFS software changes were made to fix various issues with
deploying the WFS off-axis.  These were tested out and off-axis WFS
data acquired.  No obvious signs of M1-M2 misalignment were found in
this data, though the poor conditions probably prevented us from
getting data that was stable and consistent enough to test that
adequately.

The software changes were also put through their paces by doing a long
elcoll run.  The results of this are shown Figure 1.  The systems were
pretty far out of thermal equilibrium after being closed up and worked
on for over two days and then closed for most of the first half of the
night due to clouds.  This is likely the cause for most of the scatter seen
in the results, especially for focus (Z motion).  However, it's clear
that there are significant zero-point offsets compared to the previous
results.  There may be slight changes in the elevation-dependent
terms, but they're not significant given the scatter in the data.
It's also clear that the significant transverse terms (X and Ty) that
we've been observing are still there.  The hexapod open-loop
parameters were updated to use these new results except for focus
where only the zeropoint was updated.

After the elcoll run was completed, we took a set of pointing data.
The conditions were a bit poor and the automatic selection of
reference stars was not as efficient as we would have liked so we
didn't get as much data as we intended.  However, it was clear while
taking the data that the combination of updated elcoll and existing
pointing model yielded very good results.  Even long slews usually
brought stars within 1-2" of the center of rotation.  We saw some
slight signs of systematic behavior as a function of position on the
sky, but the data was too sparse and noisy (due to wind) to provide a
significant improvement over what we had.  


Figure 1 (elcoll_color.pdf):  Results of the elcoll data obtained
during the night of April 8-9.  The fits to the previous results are
shown as red lines.  
