      Operator and Engineering Interface Development and Updates

Several dozen MMT Engineering web pages were updated to use the
Javascript Ajax.Request class from the Prototype.js library.  Other
changes to web pages include increased use of the 'mmtlogs' MySQL
database and RRDTool PNG images.

The Ajax.Request class accounts for differences in the XMLHttpRequest
class in different web browsers.  The change was made to use a widely
used Ajax library.  A Javascript file, updater2.js, was created that
contains common code for using the Ajax.Request class for MMT web
pages.  The Javascript 'MMTDiv' class, defined in 'MMTDiv.js', was
also expanded to include many common MMT user interface features.  A
PHP class, also called 'MMTDiv' and found in the 'mmtdiv.inc' file,
was created for server-side interaction with the Javascript MMTDiv
class.

A new web page was developed as a front-end to aluminization modeling:
http://hacksaw.mmto.org/engineering/aluminize/aluminize_combined.php.
This web page combined four previous web pages that handled different
"can" and "ring" filament geometries and different output array sizes.
The web page uses existing compiled C programs to model the thickness
of aluminum that is deposited on mirrors during aluminization.  It
presents the modeling results in a text summary, a FITS image, and a
PNG image which is displayed on the web page.

The capabilities of the widely-used Flash 9 plug-in from Adobe and the
recently released Flex 2 programming environment were investigated.
It offers greater efficiency as well as greater flexibility and power
in interface design/implementation than HTML+javascript-based Ajax
methods, but retains much of the ability to tightly couple with
server-side PHP scripting that we make extensive use of.  The
web-based cell error log viewer, 'rerr', was re-written using this
technology.  The new version is at least 4 times more efficient than
the Ajax version, reducing the CPU usage from 20% to less than 5% on
yggdrasil during a primary mirror bump test.  Both the Ajax and the
Flex 2 versions use less than 1% CPU when the log file is not being
appended.

To get around other limitations of the older version 1.5 of Firefox
that is installed by default under Fedora 5 and 6, we installed our
own copy of Firefox 2 under the /mmt hierarchy.  This newer version is
significantly more efficient and has the ability to restore the
previous session in the event of a browser crash.  This is a key
feature that will allow operators to quickly bring their interfaces
back up they way they were if their browser dies.  Special commands
were set up to allow the operators to run Firefox 2 as the "mmtop"
user.  This allows a common profile and set of web pages to be used by
the various operators while allowing them to continue using the
system-provided browser for personal use.  The Java and Flash 9
plugins were also installed for use with Firefox 2.

Various Engineering web pages were removed and replaced by new pages.
A new web page was created that combines the All-sky camera with three
webcams located in the chamber.


			   Hexapod Software

The hexapod network server code has been successfully ported from
vxworks to linux.  This allows us to retire another VME crate and
instead run the network server code on hacksaw along with the rest of
our TCS services.  The linux server was deployed in mid-February and
has been used throughout the current f/5 run with no problems of note.
Testing remains to be done in the f/9 and f/15 configurations, but
since the actual code changes were fairly minimal and well-tested with
f/5 we don't expect there to be any complications.

The f/5 hexapod was tested with the high resolution umac data
gathering utility and was found to have following errors similar to
f/9.  Tuning the servo parameters reduced the following error to an
acceptable level.  It should now be possible to make focus and
collimation adjustments without changing the object position
significantly.  This should allow use to safely make focus changes
while taking imaging data (e.g. with megacam).  The new servo
parameters have been in use during the current f/5 run with Hecto
installed and have shown a clear improvement in performance.  The
Hecto operators report that with the previous tuning guide stars would
routinely bounce out of their guide boxes during focus changes, but
now stay very steady with little, if any, noticeable movement.
Later, we will tune and test the f/9-f/15 hexapod.  


		  SCCS/ICE Modifications and Updates

Skip worked with Mike Lesser to debug problems in the AzCam controller
software for the Red and Blue Channel spectrographs.  These involved
power on initialization and problems with pause and resume.  These
problems seem to have been resolved, but we need one more round of
testing to be sure.

Skip also started on phase 2 of the software upgrade to the red and
blue channel spectrograph control software.  Most of the functionality
that is currently contained within the client-side GUI will be
moved into the server.  The client will then be reimplemented as a
much simpler browser-based interface. 


			     Mount Servos

Work continues of the telescope elevation axis servo.  A nominal 20 Hz
oscillation appeared, a feature that has annoyed the adaptive optics
group (since this telescope resonance involves the secondary hub), but
which had not actually seemed significant in regards to the mount axis
servos.  It would seem that the telescope has changed since the Fall
of 2006, and there exist reasons to explain this: in particular
efforts to tighten and stiffen the telescope front end.  A 20 Hz notch
filter was added to the elevation servo controller (and previous 85
and 161 Hz filters were dropped, since the accumulated phase lag
through a long cascade of filters was itself making the loop
unstable).  This new topology so far seems successful, and allows more
critical tuning of other servo parameters, which is now in progress.

A telemetry facility was added to the mount computer to capture slew
and tracking data during normal operations.  Tracking data is captured
every time we acquire a new object for observation.  After we slew to
an object, we wait until the servo error is less than some threshold,
then capture 120 seconds of data at 100 Hz.  This data remains in a
queue in the mount computer until it has been read out and logged to
disk by a program dedicated to this purpose which runs on our mountain
linux server hacksaw.  This facility has been quite successful and
convenient and will be expanded to collect other forms of detailed
telemetry for the mount computer, as well as the primary mirror
support (aka cell computer).


		   Improved Error Analysis Facility

As the overall control system at the MMT grows in complexity, it
becomes ever more difficult and subtle to troubleshoot problems.  In
particular, our operators are confronted with a plethora of
information, and are hard put to monitor all possible subsystems for
errors.  We have decided to begin work on a single centralized error
reporting interface that will ultimately raise a single red flag to
get the operators attention and then direct them to the subsystem in
question and the specific problem that caused the alert.  One example
is the occasional event where one of the mount drives is killed by a
safety chain dropout.  This in the past has often been detected
indirectly by audible clues, or by loss of a guide star, but we would
prefer and now have a direct indicator of this event.  We expect this
system to grow and be refined over the coming months.

An MMT subsystem status web page is under development:
http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/engineering/sysstat/.  This web page
uses a small number of status indicators to show the overall status
for subsystems, such as "Cell", "Mount", and "Thermal".  The web page
attempts to automate monitoring of MMT subsystems, relieving the
telescope operators from this task.  At present, approximately 100
status questions are queried to determine the overall status of the
subsystems.  New variables are being developed for the cell and mount
crates to summarize system status.  These variables will be queried by
the "sysstat" web page as they become available.  Input from other
staff members is needed to help refine the appropriate subsystem
status under various conditions.


			Service Request System

Dallan Porter has launched the new MMT Service Request System. All of
the previous SR entries have been imported into the new database and
it is online and available for use. The old SR System is being phased out
so update your bookmarks. The URL for the new system is:
http://www.mmto.org/staff/mmt/service/

		    New Staff Web Page at mmto.org

Dallan is also working on a new 'Staff Only' web page for the MMT
website.  The new page will be a location where staff members can log
in and get an overall view of whats happening at the MMT. The page
will display dynamic information from several MMT databases and
present the information in a useful and efficient manner. The page
will contain a section which will summarize what is happening at the
MMT for the current day. For example: who the observer is for today,
who the operator is for today, what instrument is installed, what SR's
are currently open and their priority + status, and other useful
links. In addition to displaying daily activity information at the
MMT, the new page will provide a interface to view/add/organize images
in the MMT image archives.


			  Observer Catalogs

Dallan is adding a new tool to the MMT Observer catalog submission web
page to provide observers with a visual display of their submitted
catalog entries. The catalog targets are superimposed onto MMT All-Sky
Camera images to aid the observer in object selection.  The tool is
interactive and allows the observer to click on any target to display
a plot of the calculated airmass and elevation over time.  A beta
version is already available to observers and a link is provided when
they submit their catalogs online.


		     All-Sky Camera Data Analysis

