		   New Spectrograph Control System

A new GUI-based spectrograph control system that runs under linux has
been deployed on the mountain for Blue and Red Channel.  It replaces
the old DOS PC that had been used for spectrograph control for well
over a decade and old PASCAL-based software that had been in use for
at least 15 years.  The new system communicates over the network to a
Lantronix DC-10 ethernet-to-RS232 converter that is attached to the
computer that runs the motors within the spectrographs (the MSD box).
The new software is installed under /mmt/sccs on hacksaw, hoseclamp,
and alewife and can be run from any of those machines, though the
Lantronix only allows a single network connection at a time.  The GUIs
can be invoked by running '/mmt/sccs/bccs' for Blue Channel and
'/mmt/sccs/rccs' for Red Channel.  Desktop menu entries have also been
added so that the new GUIs show up under Extras->Other along with
other MMT software.  

Figures 1 & 2 show screenshots of the main Blue and Red Channel GUIs.
Since the spectrographs are slow to respond, configuration changes
(with the exception of opening/closing the Blue Channel shutter) are
queued within the GUI until the Configure Spectrograph button is
clicked.  The icons to the right of each setting provide feedback on
that setting's status.  In the File pull-down menu there are entries
for saving and loading spectrograph configurations.  This makes it
much simpler to swap between different observing modes and reduces the
risk of forgetting to set something important like an order-blocking
filter.  A link to the on-line user manual (http://www.mmto.org/SCCS/)
is also provided via the Help pull-down menu.

For users within the mmtop group, an entry to bring up the Engineering
Interface is also provided from the File pull-down.  This brings up
two more windows that are shown in Figures 3 & 4.  The Configure
Motors window provides the capability of querying and setting the
index positions for each of the indexed motors (e.g. grating and
filter wheels) and the ability to command each indexed motor to a
specific position.  Direct access to grating and TIRP angle positions
plus some MSD box commands are also provided.  The Set Gratings and
Filters window is used to configure what is installed in each filter
and grating wheel position and on the magnetic plate.  The filter and
magnetic plate configuration only entails typing in a label that will
get displayed in the main user GUI.  Configuring the gratings is
somewhat more complicated.  Buttons are provided to configure the
spectrographs in the way required for grating or cover changes.  For
each grating position, there is a menu containing all available
gratings and controls for configuring the zeropoint of the selected
grating.  The Save Configuration button will save all of the settings
to disk on hacksaw, hoseclamp, and alewife and update the main GUI
accordingly.  

Figure 1 (bccs.jpg): Screenshot of the Blue Channel Control System
GUI.

Figure 2 (rccs.jpg): Screenshot of the Red Channel Control System GUI.

Figure 3 (motors.jpg): Screenshot of the Configure Motors window.

Figure 4 (config.jpg): Screenshot of the Set Gratings and Filters
window.


		       Improved WFS Centroiding

In an effort to improve the automation of the WFS as well as its
ability to measure the seeing, work was done to replace the relatively
rudimentary centroiding routines based on IRAF's starfind with a more
robust and adaptive scheme based on DAOphot.  The big advantage of
DAOphot is that it will compute an analytical point-spread function
(PSF) for each image rather than assuming a single, simple profile
like a gaussian.  It can also compute the PSF as a function of
location in each image.  When the seeing is good (<0.8") the WFS spots
are well-approximated by a gaussian and simple schemes like starfind
or daofind (the first pass of a DAOphot analysis) perform very well.
Once the seeing gets worse than about 1" to 1.3", however, the spot
profiles begin to deviate significantly from a gaussian and frequently
vary considerably across the image (e.g. due to dome seeing or other
effects).  

In principle, daofind is very similar to the starfind routine we had
been using.  In practice, it has been found to be much more robust in
finding the appropriate spots and far less sensitive to seeing and
image brightness.  A single set of parameters works quite well over a
large range of seeing (<0.5" to about 2", though recently more
tweaking was required to handle >3" seeing) and brightness which
obviates the need for the operators to frequently fiddle with
starfind's centroiding parameters.  The output from daofind is input
into the rest of DAOphot where a best-fit position-dependent PSF is
calculated and then the spots recentroided using that model.  The PSF
model is also averaged across the image to calculate a measure of the
seeing.  The seeing measures from DAOphot are MUCH more accurate than
those from starfind and correlate quite well with direct measures of
seeing from various instruments (e.g. PISCES, Flamingos, MegaCAM).  

One downside of DAOphot is that it is considerably slower than our old
method.  Tests are ongoing to help optimize and streamline it
further.  
