		  Wavefront Sensor Analysis Software

Over the course of the f/5 engineering runs in May and June the WFS
analysis software was engineered to the point where it works at least
as well as for the f/5 WFS as it does for the f/9 system.  The key to
solving many of the problems we had with the f/5 system during the
April run was replacing the finely pitched lenslet array that the
Puntino WFS unit originally came with.  Dan Fabricant obtained and
installed a coarser lenslet array as well as some extra optics that
were needed to correctly image the pupil onto the lenslet array
(another source of previous problems).  The coarser array greatly
simplifies the process of associating spot centroids with their
reference positions, especially when the seeing is degraded, while
still providing a more than adequate number of apertures across the
pupil.  Figure 1 shows what kind of image quality it is possible to
achieve in as few as 2 iterations with the f/5 system under good
conditions.

Specific modifications, additions, and improvements to the software
include:

Interactive Aperture Overlay - This is based on Steve West's original
interactive overlay and was resurrected to help deal with the closely
spaced spots of the original lenslet array.  See Figure 2 for a
screenshot.  It not necessary as frequently with the new array, but
still provides a useful fallback mode when conditions are poor and the
default centroiding parameters do not work well.  Both the f/5 and f/9
systems will bring up the interactive overlay if the criteria for
initial spot association are not met.

Inserting Telescope and Other Data in WFS Image Headers - The first
cut at this was done previously for the f/9 WFS, but required some
non-trivial modifications of some core code in the Mill's Apogee
software.  This has been replaced by a much more general perl script
that takes a FITS file as input, queries the mount, hexapod, and
thermal systems, and places the collected information into the FITS
header.  Having as much information as possible in the image headers
will greatly ease mining of WFS data to profile telescope performance.

Handling of Arbitrary Rotator Position - Steve West put hooks in the
analysis code to handle non-zero rotator angles, but these were unused
and not fully tested.  It is now fully implemented via parsing rotator
angles out of the image headers and has been tested by inserting known
amounts of aberrations at various angles.  Thus the WFS can be used
successfully at any rotator angle and will even work with the rotator
on, though that is not recommended.  Several tests were performed to
confirm that everything is indeed derotated properly. 

WFS Interface GUI for f/5 - Using a script provided by John Roll as a
starting point, a GUI was built to remotely control the f/5 WFS stage
and acquire images.  A screenshot of it is shown in Figure 3.  It's a
relatively simple interface that provides the ability to move the WFS
stage in and out of the field, select and configure which camera to
use, and configure and acquire images from the selected camera.

New Interface for the f/9 WFS CCD - To faciliate running the f/9 WFS
in a fully remote fashion, the original tcl/tk-based Apogee CCD
interface has been replaced with a GUI based on the one used to
remotely control the f/5 WFS.  A screenshot is shown in Figure 4.  It
remotely executes a script on the wavefront computer to acquire an
image and then reads it out over the network via NFS.  

Simplified WFS Startup and Automated Data Archiving - Both the f/9 and
f/5 systems can now be fully brought up via desktop menu entries on
hacksaw and hoseclamp.  The data generated from WFS sessions on either
computer are collected every morning and archived in /mmt/wfsdat.  

New Method of Correcting Spherical Aberration - Spherical aberration
is one of the most problematic modes to bend in or out of the primary.
It requires applying force in one direction on the inner and outer
parts of the mirror while applying force in the opposite direction in
between.  This is not a natural bending mode of the mirror and thus
can require large amounts of force to correct relatively small amounts
of aberration.  With the help of Brian Mcleod, we did some tests to
come up with a combination of defocus and spherical that would offset
the r^2 term in the spherical mode and leave us with something that is
monotonic with radius and reduce the corrective force required (see
Figure 5).  The result should be analogous to the so-called 'cone
mode' that Magellan implements for their primary mirrors.  It turns
out that introducing 6 nm of zernike defocus for every 1 nm of
spherical minimizes the amount of force required to correct a given
amount of spherical.  The difference is almost a factor of two less
force versus introducing no defocus.  The defocus introduced into the
primary can then be compensated for by moving the secondary
accordingly.  This method is now fully implemented within the WFS
analysis software and has been used to successfully correct for over 1
micron of spherical aberration on a number of occasions.  The old
method would require more corrective force than the cell will allow to
correct that much spherical aberration.


Figure 1 (f5_wfs_small.png): A screenshot of the full f/5 WFS desktop
showing the results after two corrective iterations under good seeing
conditions. 

Figure 2 (overlay.jpg): This window provides a fallback to the
automatic routines in the WFS software and allows the user to align
the reference spot positions (red boxes) with the measured spots in
the image.  Clicking and dragging anywhere in the image will move the
entire reference pattern around at once.  The 'Mag+' and 'Mag-'
buttons will scale the reference pattern to account for any focus
offset.  The centroiding parameters HWHM (Half-width at half maximum)
and Threshold can be changed and then applied to the image by clicking
'Re-centroid'. 

Figure 3 (f5_gui.png): A simple graphical interface for controlling
the f/5 WFS stage and acquiring images from the CCD cameras contained
within the stage.  

Figure 4 (f9_gui.png): A simple graphical interface for remotely
acquiring images from the Apogee CCD hooked up to the f/9 wavefront
computer. 

Figure 5a (non_cone.png) and 5b (cone.png): Figure 5a shows the
wavefront error across the pupil due to pure spherical aberration.
Note how it is positive in the outer and inner parts and negative in
the middle.  Figure 5b shows the combination of 6 nm zernike
defocus per nm of spherical.  The wavefront error is now monotonically
increasing with radius which is much easier to bend out.  The PSF is,
of course, much worse when extra wavefront error is added on purpose,
but the defocus component can be easily compensated for by moving the
secondary.  
