		  Wavefront Sensor Analysis Software

Over the course of the f/5 engineering runs in May and June the WFS
analysis software was engineered to the point where it works at least
as well as for the f/5 WFS as it does for the f/9 system.  The key to
solving many of the problems we had with the f/5 system during the
April run was replacing the finely pitched lenslet array that the
Puntino WFS unit came with.  Dan Fabricant obtained and installed a
coarser lenslet array as well as some extra optics that were needed to
correctly image the pupil onto the lenslet array (another source of
previous problems).  The coarser array greatly simplifies the process
of associating spot centroids with their reference positions,
especially when the seeing is degraded, while still providing a more
than adequate number of apertures across the pupil.

Specific modifications, additions, and improvements to the software
include:

Interactive Aperture Overlay - This is based on Steve West's original
interactive overlay and was resurrected to help deal with the closely
spaced spots of the original lenslet array.  See Figure 1 for a
screenshot.  It is not as necessary with the new array, but still
provides a useful fallback mode when conditions are poor and the
default centroiding parameters do not work well.  Both the f/5 and f/9
systems will bring up the interactive overlay if the criteria for
initial spot association are not met.

Inserting Telescope and Other Data in WFS Image Headers - The first
cut at this was done previously for the f/9 WFS, but that required
some non-trivial modifications of some core code in the Mill's Apogee
software.  This has been replaced by a much more general perl script
that takes a FITS file as input, queries the mount, hexapod, and
thermal systems, and places that information into the FITS header.
Having all the information in the image headers will greatly ease
mining of WFS data to profile telescope performance. 

Handling of Arbitrary Rotator Position - Steve West put hooks in the
analysis code to handle non-zero rotator angles, but these were unused
and not fully tested.  It is now fully implemented via parsing rotator
angles out of the image headers and has been tested by inserting known
amounts of aberrations at various angles.  Thus the WFS can be used
successfully at any rotator angle and will even work with the rotator
on, though that is not recommended. 






Figure 1 (overlay.jpg): This window provides a fallback to the
automatic routines in the WFS software and allows the user to align
the reference spot positions (red boxes) with the measured spots in
the image.  Clicking and dragging anywhere in the image will move the
entire reference pattern around at once.  The 'Mag+' and 'Mag-'
buttons will scale the reference pattern to account for any focus
offset.  The centroiding parameters HWHM (Half-width at half maximum)
and Threshold can be changed and then applied to the image by clicking
'Re-centroid'.  Clicking 'Accept' will take the reference pattern
position and the improved centroiding and use them to continue
analysis of the image.  Clicking 'Discard' will cause the image to be
ignored from any further processing.
