			 Observing Conditions

The Fall 2008 trimester had some of the consistently best seeing that
we've seen in over 5 years.  The median seeing for the entire
trimester was 0.71" (based on 3545 WFS observations) and the seeing was
0.5" or better more than 15% of the time.  It culminated on the last
night of the year when MegaCam data was obtained with 0.3" FWHM
stellar PSFs in images with 40-60 sec exposure times, no autoguiding,
and smooth 10-15 mph winds.  The seeing values measured directly in
the MegaCam images agreed very well with the ones measured by the WFS.
This is further validation of our technique for deriving seeing values
from the WFS data.  The fact that we were able to achieve such good
image quality without guiding also shows how good our tracking can be.

The good seeing is in large part due to long stretches of stable, mild
weather that we had the 2nd half of September, most of October, and
parts of November.  The histograms of wind, temperature, and humidity
help bear this out.  The outside ambient temperature was between 10
and 15 C roughly half the time while the humidity was near saturation
about 10% of the time, but generally dry otherwise.  The winds were
slightly lower overall with the median average and median gust speeds
each down 2 mph from the summer.  

seeing.ps: Seeing histograms for each trimester of 2008. The seeing
values are corrected to zenith using the standard model of atmospheric
turbulence.  Note how the seeing was markedly better during the fall
than during the spring or summer.

fall_08_temp.ps:  Histograms of nighttime humidity and temperature
during the fall 2008 trimester.  Only data acquired between 6 PM and 6
AM is included. 

fall_08_wind.ps:  Histograms of nighttime wind speed and direction
during the fall 2008 trimester.  Only data acquired between 6 PM and 6
AM is included.


			     AO Software

A number of modifications and improvements were made to the AO
software over the course of the fall trimester.  These include:

TSS Server - The Thin Shell Safety (TSS) system has a communications
interface that only allows one client to connect to it at a time.
Most of the time the one client would be a 'dm_status' GUI that
displays parameters reported by the TSS.  However, when preparing the
mirror for operation or shutting it down, the one client limitation
required the DM operator to close the dm_status connection so the
other software could talk to the TSS and then reopen it afterwards.  A
TSS server was developed to act as an intermediary to manage multiple
simultaneous clients.  The bulk of the work was performed by Tom
Trebisky with help from Tim Pickering in testing and deployment and
from Skip Schaller to get TSS information incorporated into ao_gui.
The TSS server was fully commissioned and deployed during the
weathered-out December AO run and eventually used successfully during
the January 2009 AO run.  

Science Server - The science server for the AO system acts as an
intermediary that allows instrument control software to coordinate
control of the MMT mount, the AO topbox, and the AO loop.  AO
instruments frequently need to nod or dither between exposures and
the science server provides a way to automatically turn the loop gain
down, move the telescope, move the field steering mirror, and then
turn the loop gain back up when a dither or nod is commanded.
Previously it was implemented as a stand-alone tcl/tk GUI.  Skip
Schaller modified it to act as a server running in the background with
the configuration interface incorporated into the main ao_gui
interface.  The new science server was deployed and used successfully
during the November and December AO runs. 

New Actuator Current Limit Handling - Previously, the actuator current
limits in the DM were based on absolute values for individual
actuators.  If one actuator hit a limit, the loop would break.  This
highly conservative approach wasn't a dealbreaker for NGS, but
severely hampered LGS under all but the very best conditions.  Vidhya
Vaitheeswaran implemented a new approach that monitors the RMS of all
actuator currents over a period of time.  This was a breakthrough for
LGS operations and was ported over to NGS operations during the
November run.  On the first night the new limit scheme was used with
NGS we were able to keep the loop closed on the same object from 5:50
PM until 12:40 AM without any interruption.  The conditions during
most of that time were exquisite, though there were numerous occasions
where the loop would likely have broken with the original limit
scheme.  We expect this new scheme to greatly improve the efficiency
of NGS operations and extend the range of conditions where NGS is able
to work.  
