			 Observing Conditions

The Fall 2008 trimester had some of the consistently best seeing that
we've seen in over 5 years.  The median seeing for the entire
trimester was 0.73" and the seeing was 0.5" or better about 20% of the
time.  It culminated on the last night of the year when MegaCam data
was obtained with 0.3" FWHM stellar PSFs in images with 40-60 sec
exposure times, no autoguiding, and smooth 10-15 mph winds.  The
seeing values measured directly in the MegaCam images agreed very well
with the ones measured by the WFS.  This is further validation of our
technique for deriving seeing values from the WFS data.  The fact that
we were able to achieve such good image quality without guiding also
shows how good our tracking can be.

The good seeing is in large part due to long stretches of stable, mild
weather that we had the 2nd half of September, most of October, and
parts of November.  The histograms of wind, temperature, and humidity
help bear this out.  The outside ambient temperature was between 10
and 15 C roughly half the time while the humidity was near saturation
about 10% of the time, but generally dry otherwise.  The winds were
slightly lower overall with the median average and median gust speeds
each down 2 mph from the summer.  

seeing.ps: Seeing histograms for each trimester of 2008. The seeing
values are corrected to zenith using the standard model of atmospheric
turbulence.  Note how the seeing was markedly better during the fall
than during the spring or summer.

fall_08_temp.ps:  Histograms of nighttime humidity and temperature
during the fall 2008 trimester.  Only data acquired between 6 PM and 6
AM is included. 

fall_08_wind.ps:  Histograms of nighttime wind speed and direction
during the fall 2008 trimester.  Only data acquired between 6 PM and 6
AM is included.


			     AO Software

A number of modifications and improvements were made to the AO
software over the course of the fall trimester.  These include:

TSS Server - The Thin Shell Safety (TSS) system has a communications
interface that only allows one client to connect to it at a time.
Most of the time the one client would be a 'dm_status' GUI that
displays parameters reported by the TSS.  However, when preparing the
mirror for operation or shutting it down, the one client limitation
required the DM operator to close the dm_status connection so the
other software could talk to the TSS. 
