			    All-Sky Camera

The storm that rolled over Mt. Hopkins on July 16 that helped to put
out the forest fire also hit the sky camera with some lightning.  Near
the end of the daytime movie from that day there is a bright flash at
18:31 MST and then garbled video afterwards.  At the same time, the
system logs on the computer running the sky camera reported a spurious
interrupt and overvoltage on the serial port connected to the camera.
Subsequent forensic testing confirmed that the serial port on the
computer was fried as well as the StellaCam's power supply and RS232
communications box.  The rest of the computer, including the
framegrabber card, was fine.  It turned out that the StellaCam itself
is also fine except for it's gamma adjustment and automatic iris
controls.  The gamma adjustment is not useful, but the iris control is
essential for daytime outdoor use so a replacement camera was ordered
and installed.  The old camera is still useful for nighttime purposes,
though, and could be used as a more sensitive RATcam or chamber
surveillance camera.


		    Mt. Hopkins Seeing Conditions

The summer shutdown provided a good opportunity to look over the 2+
years of seeing data that have been collected with our Shack-Hartmann
wavefront sensors.  Every image taken with those instruments provides
a seeing data point by measuring the average spot width and deriving
the seeing from that using a standard atmospheric turbulence model.
Thus far we have just shy of 20,000 such data points.  Figure 1 shows
total and cumulative histograms of this data.  The distribution is
similar to what was observed with the old MMT with a peak near 0.7"
and a long tail.  The seeing was better than 1.0" nearly 3/4 of the
time and better than 0.5" about 1/6 of the time.  This confirms
Mt. Hopkins status as a site with good to excellent seeing.  

Breaking the data down allows us to look for possible trends.  Figure
2 shows the results of plitting the data into UT quadrants.  The bin
for the last quarter of the night (3 AM onwards) has a significantly
narrower peak and lower median seeing than the other quadrants. This
is consistent with the conventional wisdom that seeing often settles
down overnight and is best at the end of the night.  It's possible
this is due in part to selection effects since good nights may be more
likely to have WFS data taken at the end of the night to take the most
advantage of conditions.  On the other hand, the results from the end
of the night are the most consistent with those reported in CTM-96-4
from the old MMT where the data was also taken at the end of the
night, but in an unbiased fashion (i.e. whenever it was clear).

Breaking down the data month by month is shown in Figure 3.
Conclusions are more difficult to draw here since the smaller number
of points per bin allows good or bad nights with lots of data to skew
the results significantly.  Figure 4 shows the seeing data plotted
versus the time of year it was taken.  There are still significant
observational gaps in some of the months (February and September, in
particular) and lots of scatter in the seeing year-round.  In fact,
there is frequently a lot of scatter even in a given night.  This has
been seen qualitatively by the AO group during f/15 runs and Figures 5
and 6 show results from nights where tempfoc data was obtained.  These
are perhaps a bit unrepresentative since tempfoc data is taken
pointing due north at an elevation of about 30 degress which brings
ground layer seeing effects into much greater play.  Still, it is not
uncommon to see the seeing jump from 0.5" to 1.0" on short timescales
even at zenith.

Figure 1 (seeing.ps):  Total and cumulative histograms of the
Shack-Hartmann seeing data. 

Figure 2 (ut_bin.ps):  Histograms of seeing data divided into
quadrants of the night.  

Figure 3 (year.ps):  Histograms of seeing data divided into months of
the year. 

Figure 4 (all_year.ps):  Plot of seeing versus time of year.

Figure 5 (tempfoc_20050503.ps):  Seeing versus time for the night of
May 2, 2005.

Figure 6 (tempfoc_20050504.ps):  Seeing versus time for the night of
May 3, 2005.
