		 Modeling the MMT Aluminizing Chamber

To date, John Hill's SCOPES package for IRAF has been used to model
the deposition of aluminum within the MMT's aluminizing chamber.
However, this software is very limited in how it models the aluminum
sources and how they are baffled.  It assumes that each filament has
its own individual baffle whereas the MMT's chamber has baffles around
each ring of filaments.  Intuitively, one could imagine how this could
make a significant difference in how the deposited aluminum is
distributed over the mirror surface.  To check this qualitatively, the
algorithms from the SCOPES package were ported from IRAF to C and then
extended to treat the baffles physically via raytracing.  Figures 1
through 3 show results predicted using the geometry of the MMT primary
and the current filament positions within the aluminizing chamber.
Figure 1 shows what the original SCOPES package predicts given a
baffle angle of 30 degrees.  The RMS here is 2.7% and the maximum
peak-to-valley variation is 13 nm for a mean thickness of 95 nm.
Figure 2 shows the predictions of the new raytracing model using the
as-designed geometry of the current filament and baffle system.  The
RMS is 15.7% and the maximum peak-to-valley is 35.7 nm for a mean of
95 nm.  This is clearly much worse than we expected and suggests that
our current coating may not be as even as we'd like.  Fortunately, it
appears that the results can be significantly improved by simply
moving the filament rings up or down.  Figure 3 shows the results of
moving the inner ring down 200 mm, the middle ring up 100 mm, and the
outer ring up 200 mm.  This brings the RMS down to 3.9% and the
peak-to-valley down to 15.2 nm.  Once we determine how much range of
adjustment we have for each filament ring, we will run a grid of
models to find the optimum geometry.

Figure 1 (scopes.ps):  Results from the original aluminizing model
assuming individual baffles around each filament with a baffle angle
(measured down from horizontal) of 30 degrees. 

Figure 2 (current.ps):  Results for the current system using the
as-designed geometry of filament and baffle positions.  

Figure 3 (moved_filaments.ps):  Results obtained by moving the inner
filament ring down 200 mm, the middle ring up 100 mm, and the outer
ring up 200 mm.


	  First Tests of a Hartmann-DIMM as a Seeing Monitor

With the help of Don McCarthy, who loaned us a 10" Meade telescope
(which was actually formerly owned by Shawn Callahan), and Matt
Kenworthy (CAAO) we performed some initial feasibility tests of a
simple Hartmann-DIMM (Differential Image Motion Monitor) design for a
seeing monitor.  The classical approach to making a DIMM for measuring
the seeing is to use a 8-12" amateur-class telescope, like a Meade or
Celestron Schmidt-Cassegrain, and mask the entrance aperture down to
two 50-60 mm apertures.  A wedge prism is placed over one of the
apertures so that two separate images of a star are formed in the
image plane and the differential motion of these images is used to
determine the seeing.  A Hartmann-DIMM is similar, but separates the
images from each aperture by changing the telescope's focus in lieu of
using wedge prisms.  This design has the advantage of making it very
easy to implement multiple apertures which can provide more
information than just a single baseline.  The trade-off is that the
images formed by each aperture will be out of focus.  Fortunately, the
depth of focus provided by the relatively long focal length of the
f/10 10" Meade allows us to defocus enough to separate the individual
aperture images without significantly degrading those images.

For the initial tests, we constructed a Hartmann mask with four 2"
apertures arranged in a cross pattern which gives us six unique
baselines to monitor.  We set the telescope up in front of
T. Pickering's house and used a Supercircuits PC164 video camera plus
a framegrabber card as the imaging system.  Figure 1 shows an example
image taken of a 6th mag star.  We were initially concerned that the
small apertures and short exposure times (1/60th of a second) would
greatly limit how faint of a star we could use, but this 6th mag star
provided plenty of signal.  With better seeing even a 7th mag star
would probably be usable.  We grabbed two sets of 500 images each and
used IRAF's starfind task to find and centroid the stellar images.
Averaging the results of all baselines nets a seeing of 4.22" for the
first set of images and 4.15" for the second set.  In both sets the
two upper left to lower right baselines give significantly larger
measures of the seeing than the lower left to upper right baselines.
The average for the former for the two sets is 4.76" and for the
latter is 3.82".  This shows that the wind direction is closely
aligned with the upper left-lower right image diagonal.  More
sophisticated temporal analysis of the image motion would allow us to
determine the wind speed and actual direction.  

The next step is to do similar tests with a system mounted on the
MMT.  This would allow direct comparison with seeing measures from
direct images as well as our Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensors.  

Figure 1 (dimm.ps): Example image of a 6th mag star taken with our
Hartmann-DIMM prototype.  
