		     Primary Mirror Cell Software

Skip Schaller has developed web-browser-based replacements for the old
windx-based primary cell GUIs.  The old GUIs actually ran on the cell
crate and were displayed remotely.  This required fairly significant
resources on the crate side and special configuration on the client
side to allow the cell crate access to the local X windows
environment.  Such configuration is somewhat of a security risk. 

The first iteration of a a new GUI used a PHP back-end with an "AJAX"
javascript+html interface.  This version ran into performance problems
with certain browers due to the large number of widgets updating once
per second.  The second iteration implemented the GUIs using Java.
This version can be viewed either in a browser using a Java plugin or
run as standalone GUIs, though the browser method is more
straightforward.  It has been well-tested and used routinely for a
while.


		  SCCS/ICE Modifications and Updates

To support the new Red Channel camera that arrived in December, some
modifications were made to the AZCAM server, ICE client software, and
mmtobs observer account.  The changes were mostly minor and we were
able to successfully acquire images without issue during the
commissioning night of December 8.  A new ccdacq task called
'compflats' was added for taking flat-field exposures with continuum
lamps.  It works the same as the 'comps' task, but sets the image type
to 'flat' instead of 'comp'.  

One wrinkle with the new SCCS/AZCAM/ICE system is that pausing and
resuming exposures with Blue Channel is not nearly as reliable as
before.  After much testing by Skip, Red Channel appears to be fairly
reliable at doing this, but Blue Channel fails a significant fraction
of the time.  It fails both with the AzCamTool provided by Mike Lesser
and with our ICE interface, though more frequently with the ICE
interface.  We suspect the problem to be due to bugs in the Gen1
controller's DSP code.  Blue Channel still uses its original Gen1
controller while Red Channel has a new Gen2 controller.  We will
confer with Mike Lesser about what can be done to help fix this.


			   Hexapod Software

Skip added high resolution UMAC data gathering to the hexapod and
developed associated visualization tools.  This allows us to really
see what the pods are doing during commanded moves.  Data taken with
F9 showed that tuning the servos could yield some improvement of the
following error.  Data has yet to be taken with F5, though we expect
its servos are in even greater need of tuning.  We expect to do
testing with F5 in mid-January. 

Skip and Tom modified the hexapod code to compile and build both under
linux and vxworks.  The vxworks build of this code appears to work the
same as before, as it should, and is now being used in the hexapod
crate.  Testing of the linux build is still pending.  Once the linux
build is working and tested, we will deploy it as a server running on
hacksaw and retire the vme crate we currently use.  


		 Engineering and Operator Interfaces

Duane made numerous changes to the MMTO Engineering web pages
(http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/engineering), other GUIs, and related
MySQL and RRDtool databases.  These changes include:

-  Increased use of Ajax updating of web-page content.  A custom,
   minimalistic Ajax-style library was developed for updating web
   pages for the MMT.  This approach uses a Javascript XMLHttpRequest
   object to get data from the web server without reloading the web
   page.  Javascript Object Notation (JSON) replies from the web
   server are used to update the web page.  The technique can easily
   be applied to standard Ajax libraries, such as "prototype.js",
   http://prototype.conio.net/, and the "YAHOO User Interface
   library/YUI-Ext", http://www.jackslocum.com/blog/index.php.  The
   widespread use of these libraries makes their use attractive.

-  Refinement of a MMT-specific, "MMTDiv" Javascript class that
   optimizes Javascript interaction with the web-page Document Object
   Model (DOM) and encapsulates MMT GUI styles and behavior.

-  Addition of new data and logging variables to MySQL databases and
   tables.  Data was migrated from older ASCII background logs into
   the MySQL database.  This increases MySQL database coverage to the
   past three years.  New variables were added to the MySQL database,
   including RMS azimuth, elevation and rotator servo errors for the
   new mount software.

-  A new web-based GUI, "hexpositioner", was created to allow
   telescope operators to move the hexapod to an absolute target
   position by adjusting hexapod operator offsets.  The web page
   automatically calculates the required operator offsets for the
   desired move, based on all other current hexapod offsets.  Hexapod
   moves made through this GUI are compatible with other software that
   use hexapod offsets.

-  A web-based version of the "interlock" GUI was created and included
   in the telstat displays above the operator station.

-  Minor changes were made to existing GUI's: 
     - The Ruby/Gtk "interlock" GUI was modified to include telserver
       status 
     - The "altaz" GUI was modified to include the 15-degree elevation
       limit bypass status.


-  Web pages and MySQL database tables related to the TempTrax digital
   thermometers were modified to reflect the upgrade of the TempTrax1
   unit from an 8-probe to a 16-probe unit and the relocation of
   selected probes.

-  Modifications were made to web pages related to the secondary mirror
   support system in anticipation of removal of the hexapod crate.
   New web pages were developed that present secondary mirror support
   data versus telescope altitude.

-  Modification was made to thermal web pages to allow zooming of the
   images.

-  New web pages were created for real-time monitoring of RMS servo
   errors in the mount crate and building errors.

-  Numerous web pages were modified so that they increasingly use MySQL
   and RRDtool databases for data presentation in tabular and
   graphical form.


	       Software Knowledge Sharing With the LBTO

The MMTO and LBTO software groups got together for a series of
knowledge sharing meetings.  The first meeting was largely a high
level discussion of the LBTO's TCS architecture and some of their
software development methodologies.  At the second meeting Alex
Lovell-Troy and Chinmaya Tumkur gave us a presentation on their web
application and authentication frameworks.  They use the open-source
and freely available Fedora Directory Server to store all of their
user information and use it to integrate web, windows, and linux
authentication.  They have developed frameworks to allow web
applications to access and manage directory information.  This makes
it possible for users to access secured web pages using the same
password that they use to login to windows or linux machines.  Such an
integrated authentication system would be very desirable so we will be
in further contact with Alex and Chinmaya about setting up something
similar for our network.  At the third meeting Duane presented a
tutorial about our use of RRDtool (http://oss.oetiker.ch/rrdtool/) for
logging and visualization of meteorlogical and thermal system data.
We will continue to have semi-regular meetings between our groups as
schedules permit.  

 
	       Primary Thermal Structure Modeling Tools

The IDL routines draw_temp and batch_temp were further refined by
Betty.  The main modification was to add support for loading lists of
data files into draw_temp.  When a list is loaded, it can be navigated
via a scrollable list widget which makes it much easier to
interactively select data to analyze and view.  Tim has been using
these tools to analyze logged WFS and thermal system data to verify
and calibrate the focus corrections we calculate from the models.  The
predicted corrections match very well under some circumstances, but
not well at all at other times.  Occasionally the predictions do worse
than our current scheme of only following the temperature of the OSS.
We need to better understand why this happens and under what
circumstances before using these predictions to make open loop focus
corrections. 


	     Mining Sky Camera Data for Transient Events

Betty continues to work on automating the processing of all-sky camera
data to identify transient events.  Images are processed using the
Hough Transform and the Sextractor program with three tables of
resultant detections (Hough only, Sextractor only, and dual) written.
Input is currently limited to data taken when the Sun's is below -12.0
degrees.  So far, the results of the dual detections have been very
robust.  Work is ongoing to try and determine how many real events are
still being missed and how we might integrate this analysis into a
real-time pipeline.  

			    Committee Work

Betty volunteered to participate as a member of the IAU FITS Working
Group Technical Panel to draft updates and clarifications to the
wording of the FITS Standard document, last updated in 1999.  She has
been reviewing the document in question: The Definition of the
Flexible Image Transport System (FITS) Document.


		 MMT Service Request System Upgrades

Dallan is working on the upgrade and redesign of the MMT Service
Request System. The new version will eliminate the use of PEAR
template modules allowing for easier feature additions.  New PHP
classes will help make the database easier to work with and allow for
non-SR applications to interact with the database.

A few of the new features include:

  * Redesigned layout
  * Ability to quickly sort requests
  * Enhanced searching capabilities
  * Customizable settings on a per-user basis including optional
    pager/SMS phone messages on critical events
  * Previewing requests/responses before submitting
  * Upload image feature
  * Enhanced email option for users with HTML capable email clients
  * Reports and logging

The beta version is located at http://hacksaw.mmto.arizona.edu/service_no_PEAR/


	      Calibrating Hexapod Open Loop Corrections

We had two opportunities in early November to collect dedicated
engineering data to measure how the f/5 front-end behaves as a
function of elevation.  The first set of data was collected during the
engineering night of November 7/8.  An instrument failure allowed us
to get more data on the night of November 9/10.  