		      F/9 Open Loop Corrections

Since we did not have any dedicated engineering time to refine f/9's
open loop parameters, they were refined over the course of the f/9 run
using WFS data.  When the WFS is finished applying corrections, it
logs elevation, OSS temperatures, and hexapod platform coordinates.
These data from multiple nights are then combined and each platform
coordinate modeled with a function of the form:

f(el,T) = a*cos(el) + b*sin(el) + c*T + d

where el is the elevation and T is the average OSS temperature.  We
have been doing similar analysis to build the open loop tools for f/5,
but this is the first opportunity since our extended shutdown to do
likewise for f/9.  

The results of analyzing the f/9 WFS data from Jan 31 through March 2
are shown in Figure 1.  There is significant scatter in the data (130
um in Z and 200-215 um in X and Y) that is likely due at least in part
to the problems with the primary and secondary mirror support systems
during this time period.  Some WFS data was obviously compromised by
the primary mirror being out of position and was not included in this
analysis.  

Figure 1 (f9_2006.pdf):  Results of analyzing f/9 WFS data to
determine parameters for open loop corrections.  


    Modeling the Effects of Primary Mirror Thermal Nonuniformities

With the help of Brian Cuerden (SO) we have begun work on using finite
element analysis to model the effects that thermal nonuniformities
within the primary mirror have on its surface figure.  Our first
attempt was to follow the analysis E. Pearson and L. Stepp did for a
1.8-meter borosilicate blank.  They modeled the temperature structure
in the front and back plates using 9-term Zernike polynomials.  Then
they used finite element analysis to apply temperature distributions
corresponding to each term individually to each plate and model the
resulting figure of the front surface of the mirror.  These models of
the mirror figure can then be scaled and added linearly to correspond
to measured temperature distributions.  The goal is to take the cell
E-series temperatures for each plate, fit Zernike polynomial surfaces
to the data, use the coefficients from the fits to scale the
surface models, and then generate open loop corrections to take out
the predicted surface errors.  

Performing this analysis on the MMT primary finds that the most
significant terms are focus generated by front to back gradients and
astigmatism caused by the corresponding astigmatism terms in the
temperature distributions.  This is qualitatively consistent with what
we know from experience.  Quantitatively comparing these models with
what we observed in November shows that they are not yet quite
sufficient, however.  Figure 2 shows the focus errors predicted by the
measured temperature structure along with the focus errors that we
measured.  They don't quite match and differ by 50 microns or so most
of the time.  Other aberration modes such as astigmatism and spherical
aberration disagree with the predicted values by a factor of 10 or so.
In the case of the 1.8-meter blank, Pearson & Stepp did not find that
including the mid plate in their modeling affected their results much.
However, our empirical data from November show that the mid plate
temperature structure is often significantly different from that of
the front and back plates.  Work is ongoing to include all three
plates in the modeling.  

Figure 2 (pred_focus.ps): On November 22, 2005, we measured the
wavefront errors that resulted from intentionally forcing the primary
mirror to warm and then cool quickly.  Plotted in black are the focus
errors as measured by the WFS.  Plotted in red are the predicted focus
errors that take into account the thermal structure of the primary
mirror as well as the slight changes in elevation and OSS temperature.


		      mmto.org Website Redesign

The mmto.org website got a much needed, long overdue redesign to
improve its appearance, usability, and maintainability.  The basic
layout of the pages is now done using cascading style sheets (CSS)
rather than tables and lots of small placeholder images.  This makes
the pages much easier for clients to load and easier for us to
maintain.  The pages have also been updated to conform to the XHTML
1.0 standard which allows pages and page styles to constructed and
maintained in a more object-oriented manner.  Work remains to be done
to update and flesh out the information contained in many of the pages
and to incorporate the new style into our PHP-based systems like the
operator log, the service request system, and our dokuwiki
documentation system.  
